
1. J Oral Sci. 2020 Jan 29;62(1):36-39. doi: 10.2334/josnusd.19-0021. Epub 2019 Nov 
9.

Contribution of different adherent properties of Granulicatella adiacens and
Abiotrophia defectiva to their associations with oral colonization and the risk
of infective endocarditis.

Sasaki M(1), Shimoyama Y(1), Ishikawa T(1), Kodama Y(1), Tajika S(1), Kimura
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Microbiology, Department of Microbiology, Iwate Medical 
University.

Granulicatella adiacens (G. adiacens) and Abiotrophia defectiva (A. defectiva)
colonize the oral cavity and form part of the normal flora in the intestinal and 
genitourinary tracts. As reported previously, the frequency of isolation of G.
adiacens from the oral cavity was much higher than that of A. defectiva. However,
it has been reported that compared with G. adiacens, A. defectiva was isolated at
considerably higher frequencies from the blood of patients with infective
endocarditis (IE). Hence, in this study, the in vitro interaction of G. adiacens 
and A. defectiva strains with host surfaces and biofilm formation was examined to
assess whether their different adhesive properties contribute to their
associations with oral colonization and IE, respectively. G. adiacens exhibited
an increased binding ability to saliva-coated hydroxyapatite beads than A.
defectiva following the addition of CaCl2. Furthermore, biofilm formation was
observed only for G. adiacens with the use of a polystyrene tube and scanning
electron microscopy analysis. Conversely, A. defectiva displayed significantly
greater adherence to human umbilical vein endothelial cells and immobilized
fibronectin than G. adiacens. These findings suggest that differences in binding 
properties to host components imply specific binding mechanisms in G. adiacens
and A. defectiva, which might mediate selective colonization in the oral cavity
or are associated with the pathogenicity of endocarditis.

DOI: 10.2334/josnusd.19-0021 
PMID: 31708553  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

