
1. Microbiol Immunol. 2020 Sep 12. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12848. [Epub ahead of
print]

Abiotrophia defectiva adhere to saliva-coated hydroxyapatite beads via
interactions between salivary proline-rich-proteins and bacterial
glycerlaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase.

Sasaki M(1), Kodama Y(1), Shimoyama Y(1), Ishikawa T(1), Tajika S(1), Kimura
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of molecular microbiology, Department of Microbiology, Iwate Medical 
University, 1-1-1 Idaidori, Yahaba-cho, Shiwa-gun, Iwate, 028-3694, Japan.

Abiotrophia defectiva is a species of nutritionally variant streptococci that is 
found in human saliva and dental plaques and that has been associated with
infective endocarditis. In our previous study, we found that A. defectiva could
bind specifically to saliva-coated hydroxyapatite beads (SHA). In this study, we 
identified a cell surface component of A. defectiva that promotes adherence to
SHA beads. Binding of A. defectiva to SHA was reduced in the presence of
antibodies against human proline-rich protein (PRP); these results suggested that
PRP may be a critical component mediating the interactions between A. defectiva
and the salivary pellicle. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of whole A.
defectiva cells followed by Far-Western blotting was conducted by probing with
synthetic peptides analogous to the binding region of PRP known as PRP-C. The
results indicate that an A. defectiva protein of 37 kDa interacts with PRP-C.
Results of amino-terminal sequencing of the adhesive A. defectiva protein
revealed significant similarity to glycerlaldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH). Recombinant GAPDH bound to immobilized PRP-C in a dose-dependent manner 
and binding of A. defectiva to SHA or to PRP was reduced in the presence of
anti-GAPDH antiserum. Western blotting or electron immunomicroscopic observations
with anti-GAPDH antiserum revealed that this protein was expressed in both
cytosolic and cell wall fractions. These results suggest that A. defectiva could 
specifically bind to PRP via interactions with cell surface GAPDH; the findings
suggest a mechanism underlying A. defectiva-mediated adherence to saliva-coated
tooth surfaces. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1348-0421.12848 
PMID: 32918493 

