
1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 May;8(9):604. doi: 10.21037/atm.2020.02.158.

High clinical impact of rapid susceptibility testing on CHROMID ESBL® medium
directly from swabs.

Romo-Ibáñez Á(1), Calatrava-Hernández E(2), Gutiérrez-Soto B(3), Pérez-Ruiz M(2),
Navarro-Marí JM(2), Gutiérrez-Fernández J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of
Granada-Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las
Nieves-Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria, Granada, Spain.
(3)Family Medicine Unit, Health Center San Fernando, Badajoz, Spain.

Background: Antibiotic resistance is a serious public health challenge
exacerbated by the widespread use of β-lactam and glycopeptide antibiotics. The
identification of resistances is crucial, and CHROMID ESBL medium has been
developed to detect enterobacteria with extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL).
The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of this medium to
detect other types of resistant bacteria.
Methods: Vancomycin, cefoxitin, imipenem, and cefepime disks were used to measure
growth on CHROMID ESBL medium of β-lactam-resistant Gram-negative (83 with ESBL, 
57 with carbapenemases, 35 with AmpC and 3 Stenotrophomonas maltophilia) and
Gram-positive [37 vancomycin-susceptible (vancoS) microorganisms and 21
vancomycin-resistant (vancoR) Enterococcus faecium] clinical isolates
(retrospective study) and colonization by the aforementioned bacteria
(prospective study), using 649 rectal swabs, 314 pharyngeal swabs, and 44 swabs
from other localizations.
Results: Retrospective study: species grown on the medium exhibited different
colors. Growth on the medium was observed for: all ESBL enterobacteria, which
were susceptible to imipenem and cefoxitin; 95% of isolates with carbapenemases, 
mostly resistant to imipenem; 80% of those with AmpC; 86% of vancoR E. faecium
isolates; and 42% of vancoS E. faecalis isolates, with large growth inhibition
halos around the vancomycin disk. Prospective study: vancoR E. faecium, ESBL
Klebsiella, Pseudomonas with carbapenemases, A. baumannii (mostly from rectal
swabs), S. maltophilia, Achromobacter xylosoxidans, and Burkholderia cenocepacia 
(mostly from pharyngeal swabs) were isolated from the 246 positive samples.
Conclusions: CHROMID ESBL medium permitted the differential growth of
Gram-negative bacteria, many with ESBL and carbapenemases. ESBL enterobacteria
were susceptible to imipenem, carbapenemase-producing microorganisms grew around 
the imipenem disk, and vancoR E. faecium was isolated on the medium. Results of
the prospective study demonstrate the potential clinical relevance of this
medium. S. maltophilia was more frequently detected with pharyngeal swabs and
ESBL Klebsiella, A. baumannii, and Pseudomonas with rectal swabs.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm.2020.02.158 
PMCID: PMC7290529
PMID: 32566630 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm.2020.02.158). The series “Advances in Laboratory
Tests for Infectious Diseases” was commissioned by the editorial office without
any funding or sponsorship. The authors have no other conflicts of interest to
declare.

