
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Aug 14;99(33):e20746. doi:
10.1097/MD.0000000000020746.

Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole-induced hyponatremia in an elderly lady with
Achromobacter xylosoxidans pneumonia: Case report and insights into mechanism.

Ghali MGZ(1), Kim MJ.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartments of Neurological Surgery, Internal Medicine, and Neurophysiology, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden bDepartments of Neurological Surgery,
Neurophysiology, and Internal Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
cDepartments of Neurological Surgery and Neurophysiology, University of Finland, 
Helsinki, Finland dDepartment of Neurological Surgery, University Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland eDepartment of Neurological Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA fDepartment of Neurological
Surgery, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ, USA gDepartments of
Neurological Surgery and Internal Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical Institute,
Baltimore, MD, USA hDepartment of Neurological Surgery, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada iDepartment of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA.

RATIONALE: Hyponatremia occurs frequently in the hospital setting and may be
attributable to a host of etiologies. Drugs are frequently implicated.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) represents a well-recognized
pharmacologic precipitant of drug-induced hyponatremia, with several reports
extant in the retrievable literature. Nephrologists thus debate the mechanisms
giving rise to TMP/SMX-induced hyponatremia and the precise mechanism by which
treatment with TMP/SMX generates reductions of serum sodium concentration remain 
controversial. The agent has a well-known effect of antagonizing the effects of
aldosterone upon the distal nephron. Renal salt wasting and the syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion represent implicated mechanistic
intermediaries in TMP/SMX-induced hyponatremia.
PATIENT CONCERNS: The patient endorsed no explicit concerns.
DIAGNOSES: We describe the case of an 83-year-old female clinically diagnosed
with pneumonia found to have an initial serum sodium in the range of 130 to
134 mEq/L consistent with mild hyponatremia upon admission. Sputum cultures grew 
Achromobacter xylosoxidans susceptible to TMP/SMX. The patient's serum sodium
concentration precipitously decline following institution of treatment with
TMP/SMX to 112 to 114 mEq/L during the course of 5 days.
INTERVENTIONS: Severe hyponatremia proved recalcitrant to initial therapy with
supplemental salt tabs and standard doses of the vasopressin receptor antagonist 
tolvaptan.
OUTCOMES: Escalating doses of tolvaptan increased the patient's sodium to 120 to 
124 mEq/L. The patient was transferred to another hospital for further
management. During her stay, the patient did not exhibit frank or obvious
clinical features consistent with hyponatremia nor readily appreciable evidence
of volume depletion.
LESSONS: TMP/SMX represents a frequent, though underreported cause of
hyponatremia in the hospital setting several authors believe natriuresis may
represent the most common mechanism underlying TMP/SMX-induced hyponatremia.
Evidence implicating natriuresis to be mechanistic in TMP/SMX-induced
hyponatremia include clinically appreciable hypovolemia and resolution of
hyponatremia with oral or intravenous salt repletion. Salt repletion failed to
monotherapeutically enhance our patient's hyponatremiadisfavoring renal salt
wasting as originately mechanistic. Contemporaneous refractoriness of serum
sodium to fluid restriction nor standard doses of tolvaptan confounded our
initial attempts to mechanistically attribute the patient's hyponatremia to a
specific cause. Clinical euvolemia and rapid response of hyponatremia to
exceptionally high doses of tolvaptan strongly favors syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone to represent the chief mechanism by which TMP/SMX
exacerbates hyponatremia.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000020746 
PMCID: PMC7437830
PMID: 32871970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

