
1. World Neurosurg. 2020 Sep;141:441-447.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.283. Epub
2020 Jun 7.

Polymicrobial Intracerebral Abscess Growing Mycobacterium avium Complex and
Achromobacter xylosoxidans: Case Report and Literature Review.

Rotter J(1), Graffeo CS(1), Perry A(1), Gilder HE(1), Wilson JW(2), Link MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Neurologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA;
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA. Electronic address: Link.Michael@Mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) and Achromobacter xylosoxidans (AX)
are uncommon sources of neurosurgical infections, particularly in immunocompetent
hosts. We report the first published case of intracranial AX abscess and
polymicrobial AX-MAC abscess, as well as the fourth MAC abscess in a
non-immunocompromised patient.
METHODS: This case report was conducted via retrospective chart review. A
literature review was completed in compliance with Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses guidelines.
RESULTS: Ten years following mucocele resection, a 60-year-old man presented with
sinus congestion and headache. Head imaging revealed a left frontal lesion
abutting the cribriform plate and ethmoid roof. The patient had a left frontal
craniotomy for abscess drainage. Intraoperative cultures demonstrated
polymicrobial growth of AX and MAC, managed with antimicrobial therapy and staged
skull base reconstruction. Three cases of MAC abscess and 16 cases of AX
ventriculitis or meningitis have been reported in immunocompetent patients. All
MAC cerebral abscesses occurred in adults, one of whom succumbed to the
infection. Of the 9 AX meningitis cases, 4 occurred in neonates and 2 in
pediatric patients. Six of the 7 AX ventriculitis cases occurred after
neurosurgical operations at the same hospital from contaminated chlorhexidine
basins. Except for the neonates, AX ventriculitis or meningitis patients had
undergone neurosurgery or had a history of cranial trauma. There were no reports 
of polymicrobial AX-MAC intracranial abscess.
CONCLUSIONS: AX and MAC are rare causes of intracranial infection. Patients with 
these pathogens identified in the central nervous system require a
multidisciplinary approach for successful management.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.283 
PMID: 32525087 

