
1. Rev Mal Respir. 2020 Sep;37(7):561-571. doi: 10.1016/j.rmr.2020.06.006. Epub 2020
Jul 16.

[Emerging bacteria in cystic fibrosis and non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis from
a microbiologist's perspective].

[Article in French]

Menetrey Q(1), Dupont C(2), Chiron R(3), Marchandin H(4).

Author information: 
(1)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, université de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(2)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, laboratoire d'écologie microbienne
hospitalière, université de Montpellier, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(3)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, centre de ressources et de compétences
de la mucoviscidose, université de Montpellier, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(4)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, département de microbiologie, université
de Montpellier, CHU de Nîmes, Nîmes, France. Electronic address:
helene.marchandin@umontpellier.fr.

INTRODUCTION: Common major pathogens like Pseudomonas aeruginosa are identified
in the airways of patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) and non-CF bronchiectasis.
However, other opportunistic bacterial pathogens like Achromobacter xylosoxidans 
complex, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia and non-tuberculous mycobacteria are
currently emerging in CF and are also reported in non-CF bronchiectasis.
BACKGROUND: The emergence of opportunistic bacterial pathogens has been
recognized in CF through annual national reports of sputum microbiology data.
Despite common factors driving the emergence of bacteria identified in CF and
non-CF bronchiectasis patients, bronchiectasis registries have been created more 
recently and no longitudinal analysis of recorded microbiological data is
currently available in the literature, thereby preventing the recognition of
emerging bacteria in patients with non-CF bronchiectasis.
OUTLOOK: A longitudinal follow-up of microbiological data is still needed in
non-CF bronchiectasis to identify emerging opportunistic bacterial pathogens.
Homogeneity in practice of sputum microbiological examination is also required to
allow comparative analysis of data in CF and non-CF bronchiectasis.
CONCLUSION: Bacterial pathogens recognized as emerging in CF have to be more
carefully monitored in non-CF bronchiectasis in view of their association with
deterioration of the lung disease.

Copyright © 2020 SPLF. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmr.2020.06.006 
PMID: 32684338 

