
1. Microb Genom. 2020 Jul;6(7). doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000406. Epub 2020 Jul 15.

Duplex real-time PCR assay for the simultaneous detection of Achromobacter
xylosoxidans and Achromobacter spp.

Price EP(1)(2), Soler Arango V(1)(2), Kidd TJ(3)(4)(5), Fraser TA(1)(2), Nguyen
TK(4), Bell SC(5)(6)(4), Sarovich DS(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sunshine Coast Health Institute, Birtinya, Queensland, Australia.
(2)GeneCology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Sippy Downs,
Queensland, Australia.
(3)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, Faculty of Science, The
University of Queensland, St Lucia, Queensland, Australia.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Queensland, Australia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Herston, Queensland,
Australia.
(6)Adult Cystic Fibrosis Centre, The Prince Charles Hospital, Chermside,
Queensland, Australia.

Several members of the Gram-negative environmental bacterial genus Achromobacter 
are associated with serious infections, with Achromobacter xylosoxidans being the
most common. Despite their pathogenic potential, little is understood about these
intrinsically drug-resistant bacteria and their role in disease, leading to
suboptimal diagnosis and management. Here, we performed comparative genomics for 
158 Achromobacter spp. genomes to robustly identify species boundaries, reassign 
several incorrectly speciated taxa and identify genetic sequences specific for
the genus Achromobacter and for A. xylosoxidans. Next, we developed a Black Hole 
Quencher probe-based duplex real-time PCR assay, Ac-Ax, for the rapid and
simultaneous detection of Achromobacter spp. and A. xylosoxidans from both
purified colonies and polymicrobial clinical specimens. Ac-Ax was tested on 119
isolates identified as Achromobacter spp. using phenotypic or genotypic methods. 
In comparison to these routine diagnostic methods, the duplex assay showed
superior identification of Achromobacter spp. and A. xylosoxidans, with five
Achromobacter isolates failing to amplify with Ac-Ax confirmed to be different
genera according to 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Ac-Ax quantified both Achromobacter
spp. and A. xylosoxidans down to ~110 genome equivalents and detected down to ~12
and ~1 genome equivalent(s), respectively. Extensive in silico analysis, and
laboratory testing of 34 non-Achromobacter isolates and 38 adult cystic fibrosis 
sputa, confirmed duplex assay specificity and sensitivity. We demonstrate that
the Ac-Ax duplex assay provides a robust, sensitive and cost-effective method for
the simultaneous detection of all Achromobacter spp. and A. xylosoxidans and will
facilitate the rapid and accurate diagnosis of this important group of pathogens.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000406 
PMCID: PMC7478622
PMID: 32667877 

