
1. FEBS J. 2020 Apr 24. doi: 10.1111/febs.15343. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulations of the reduction potentials of flavin-based electron bifurcation
complexes and semiquinone stabilities are key to control directional electron
flow.

Sucharitakul J(1)(2), Buttranon S(3), Wongnate T(3), Chowdhury NP(4)(5), Prongjit
M(1), Buckel W(4)(5), Chaiyen P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chulalongkorn University, Patumwan, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(2)Skeletal Disorders Research Unit, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn
University, Patumwan, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)School of Biomolecular Science and Engineering, Vidyasirimedhi Institute of
Science and Technology (VISTEC), Rayong, Thailand.
(4)Laboratorium für Mikrobiologie, Fachbereich Biologie and Synmikro,
Philipps-Universität, Marburg, Germany.
(5)Max-Plank-Institut für terrestrische Mikrobiologie, Marburg, Germany.

The flavin-based electron bifurcation (FBEB) system from Acidaminococcus
fermentans is composed of the electron transfer flavoprotein (EtfAB) and
butyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (Bcd). α-FAD binds to domain II of the A-subunit of
EtfAB, β-FAD to the B-subunit of EtfAB and δ-FAD to Bcd. NADH reduces β-FAD to
β-FADH- , which bifurcates one electron to the high potential α-FAD•- semiquinone
followed by the other to the low potential ferredoxin (Fd). As deduced from
crystal structures, upon interaction of EtfAB with Bcd, the formed α-FADH-
approaches δ-FAD by rotation of domain II, yielding δ-FAD•- . Repetition of this 
process leads to a second reduced ferredoxin (Fd- ) and δ-FADH- , which reduces
crotonyl-CoA to butyryl-CoA. In this study, we measured the redox properties of
the components EtfAB, EtfaB (Etf without α-FAD), Bcd, and Fd, as well as of the
complexes EtfaB:Bcd, EtfAB:Bcd, EtfaB:Fd, and EftAB:Fd. In agreement with the
structural studies, we have shown for the first time that the interaction of
EtfAB with Bcd drastically decreases the midpoint reduction potential of α-FAD to
be within the same range of that of β-FAD and to destabilize the semiquinone of
α-FAD. This finding clearly explains that these interactions facilitate the
passing of electrons from β-FADH- via α-FAD•- to the final electron acceptor
δ-FAD•- on Bcd. The interactions modulate the semiquinone stability of δ-FAD in
an opposite way by having a greater semiquinone stability than in free Bcd.

© 2020 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15343 
PMID: 32329961 

