
1. JNMA J Nepal Med Assoc. 2019 Nov-Dec;57(220):424-428.

Biofilm Formation and Extended-Spectrum Beta-Lactamase Producer among
Acinetobacter Species Isolated in a Tertiary Care Hospital: A Descriptive
Cross-sectional Study.

Sharma M(1), Sapkota J(1), Jha B(1), Mishra B(1), Bhatt CP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kathmandu Medical College and Teaching Hospital,
Sinamangal, Kathmandu, Nepal.

INTRODUCTION: Acinetobacter species are short, stout, gram-negative coccobacilli,
generally considered to be a relatively low-grade pathogen. However, its
resistance towards multiple classes of antibiotics through an array of resistance
mechanisms including its ability to form biofilm has led to its emergence as an
important pathogen in hospital settings. This study was done to determine the
prevalence of biofilm former and Extended-spectrum Beta-Lactamase producer among 
Acinetobacter species.
METHODS: A descriptive cross-sectional study was done in the clinical
microbiology laboratory, Kathmandu Medical College from January to June 2019.
Convenient sampling method was used. Ethical approval was taken from the
Institutional Review Committee, Ref no. 2812201805. Preliminary identification
followed by characterization of Acinetobacter species was done. Antibiotic
susceptibility test was done using the Kirby-Bauer method following Clinical and 
Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines. Extended-spectrum Beta-Lactamase was
detected by combined disc method and Biofilm detection was done using congo red
agar method. Statistical Package for Social Sciences 16.0 version statistical
software package was used for statistical analysis. Point estimate at 95%
Confidence Interval was calculated along with frequencyand proportion for
binarydata.
RESULTS: Among 108 Acinetobacter species, 86 (79.7%) Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus-A. baumannii complex was seen. Seventy-eight (72%) of the isolates 
were multidrug-resistant, 34 (31%) of the isolates were Extended-spectrum
Beta-Lactamase producer and only 10 (9.3%) of the isolates, were biofilm
producers.
CONCLUSIONS: Multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter spp. with the ability to produce
Extended-spectrum Beta-Lactamase is prevalent in our hospital settings. Strict
compliance with infection control practices is necessary to curb its spread.


PMID: 32335654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

