
1. mSphere. 2020 Jul 29;5(4). pii: e00404-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00404-20.

Acinetobacter baumannii NCIMB8209: a Rare Environmental Strain Displaying
Extensive Insertion Sequence-Mediated Genome Remodeling Resulting in the Loss of 
Exposed Cell Structures and Defensive Mechanisms.

Repizo GD(1), Espariz M(2), Seravalle JL(2), Díaz Miloslavich JI(2), Steimbrüch
BA(2), Shuman HA(3), Viale AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biologia Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR, CONICET),
Departamento de Microbiologia, Facultad de Ciencias Bioquimicas y Farmaceuticas, 
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina repizo@ibr-conicet.gov.ar
viale@ibr-conicet.gov.ar.
(2)Instituto de Biologia Molecular y Celular de Rosario (IBR, CONICET),
Departamento de Microbiologia, Facultad de Ciencias Bioquimicas y Farmaceuticas, 
Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Acinetobacter baumannii represents nowadays an important nosocomial pathogen of
poorly defined reservoirs outside the clinical setting. Here, we conducted
whole-genome sequencing analysis of the Acinetobacter sp. NCIMB8209 collection
strain, isolated in 1943 from the aerobic degradation (retting) of desert guayule
shrubs. Strain NCIMB8209 contained a 3.75-Mb chromosome and a plasmid of 134 kb. 
Phylogenetic analysis based on core genes indicated NCIMB8209 affiliation to A.
baumannii, a result supported by the identification of a chromosomal bla
OXA-51-like gene. Seven genomic islands lacking antimicrobial resistance
determinants, 5 regions encompassing phage-related genes, and notably, 93
insertion sequences (IS) were found in this genome. NCIMB8209 harbors most genes 
linked to persistence and virulence described in contemporary A. baumannii
clinical strains, but many of the genes encoding components of surface structures
are interrupted by IS. Moreover, defense genetic islands against biological
aggressors such as type 6 secretion systems or CRISPR-cas are absent from this
genome. These findings correlate with a low capacity of NCIMB8209 to form biofilm
and pellicle, low motility on semisolid medium, and low virulence toward Galleria
mellonella and Caenorhabditis elegans Searching for catabolic genes and
concomitant metabolic assays revealed the ability of NCIMB8209 to grow on a wide 
range of substances produced by plants, including aromatic acids and defense
compounds against external aggressors. All the above features strongly suggest
that NCIMB8209 has evolved specific adaptive features to a particular
environmental niche. Moreover, they also revealed that the remarkable genetic
plasticity identified in contemporary A. baumannii clinical strains represents an
intrinsic characteristic of the species.IMPORTANCE Acinetobacter baumannii is an 
ESKAPE (Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species)
opportunistic pathogen, with poorly defined natural habitats/reservoirs outside
the clinical setting. A. baumannii arose from the Acinetobacter calcoaceticus-A. 
baumannii complex as the result of a population bottleneck, followed by a recent 
population expansion from a few clinically relevant clones endowed with an
arsenal of resistance and virulence genes. Still, the identification of virulence
traits and the evolutionary paths leading to a pathogenic lifestyle has remained 
elusive, and thus, the study of nonclinical ("environmental") A. baumannii
isolates is necessary. We conducted here comparative genomic and virulence
studies on A. baumannii NCMBI8209 isolated in 1943 from the microbiota
responsible for the decomposition of guayule, and therefore well differentiated
both temporally and epidemiologically from the multidrug-resistant strains that
are predominant nowadays. Our work provides insights on the adaptive strategies
used by A. baumannii to escape from host defenses and may help the adoption of
measures aimed to limit its further dissemination.

Copyright © 2020 Repizo et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00404-20 
PMCID: PMC7392541
PMID: 32727858 

