
1. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2020 Apr 16. pii: S0213-005X(20)30164-6. doi:
10.1016/j.eimc.2020.02.028. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of Vitek-MS™ and Microflex LT™ commercial systems for identification
of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus-baumannii complex.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Ruiz de Alegría-Puig C(1), De-Malet-Pintos-Fonseca A(2), Angulo-López I(2),
Agüero-Balbín J(3), Marco F(4), Cayô R(5), Roca I(6), Vila J(4),
Martínez-Martínez L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Service, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla-IDIVAL,
Santander, Spain. Electronic address: carlosrdap@hotmail.com.
(2)Microbiology Service, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla-IDIVAL,
Santander, Spain.
(3)Microbiology Service, University Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla-IDIVAL,
Santander, Spain; Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University
of Cantabria, Santander, Spain.
(4)ISGlobal, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;
Department of Clinical Microbiology. Hospital Clinic-Universitat de Barcelona,
Spain.
(5)Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Laboratório de Inmunologia e
Bacteriologia (LIB), Setor de Biologia Molecular, Microbiologia e Inmunologia -
Departamento de Ciências Biológicas (DCB), Instituto de Ciências Ambientais,
Químicas e Farmacêuticas (ICAQF), Diadema, SP, Brazil; Universidade Federal de
São Paulo - UNIFESP, Laboratório Alerta, Disciplina de Infectología, Departamento
de Medicina, Escola Paulista de Medicina - EPM, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(6)ISGlobal, Hospital Clinic - Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Unit of Microbiology, University Hospital Reina Sofia, Cordoba, Spain;
Department of Microbiology, University of Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain; Maimonides
Biomedical Research Institute of Cordoba (IMIBIC), Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Acinetobacter is a genus that comprises a group of opportunistic
pathogens responsible for a variety of nosocomial infections. The Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter baumannii (Acb) complex includes some species of
clinical importance, mainly A. baumannii, A. pittii and A. nosocomialis, which
share phenotypic similarities that make it very difficult to distinguish between 
them using a phenotypic approach. The aim of this study was to evaluate two
commercial matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) systems for the identification of different
Acinetobacter species, with a special focus among those belonging to the Acb
complex.
METHODS: One hundred and fifty-six Acinetobacter spp. clinical strains,
identified by amplified ribosomal DNA restriction analysis (ARDRA) and rpoB gene 
sequencing, were analysed by two different MALDI-TOF systems.
RESULTS: Considering only the 144 strains of the Acb complex evaluated in this
study, the Vitek-MS™ and Microflex LT™ systems correctly identified 129 (89.6%)
and 143 (99.3%) strains, respectively.
CONCLUSION: After analysing 156 strains belonging to Acinetobacter spp., both
Vitek-MS™ and Microflex LT™ proved to be rapid and accurate systems for the
identification of Acb complex species showing a good correlation. However, both
manufacturers should improve their databases to include new species in them.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier España, S.L.U. and Sociedad Española de Enfermedades
Infecciosas y Microbiología Clínica. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eimc.2020.02.028 
PMID: 32307128 

