
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Sep 28. pii: IAI.00259-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00259-20. [Epub
ahead of print]

CsrA supports both environmental persistence and host-associated growth of
Acinetobacter baumannii.

Farrow JM 3rd(1), Wells G(1), Palethorpe S(1), Adams MD(2), Pesci EC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Brody School of Medicine at
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA.
(2)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Brody School of Medicine at
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC, USA pescie@ecu.edu.

Acinetobacter baumannii is an opportunistic and frequently multi-drug resistant
gram-negative bacterial pathogen that primarily infects critically ill
individuals. Indirect transmission from patient to patient in hospitals can drive
infections, supported by this organism's abilities to persist on dry surfaces and
rapidly colonize susceptible individuals. To investigate how A. baumannii
survives on surfaces, we cultured A. baumannii in liquid media for several days, 
and then analyzed isolates that lost the ability to survive drying. One of these 
isolates carried a mutation that affected the gene encoding the carbon storage
regulator, CsrA. As we began to examine the role of CsrA in A. baumannii, we
observed that the growth of ΔcsrA mutant strains was inhibited in the presence of
amino acids. The ΔcsrA mutant strains had a reduced ability to survive drying and
to form biofilms, but an improved ability to tolerate increased osmolarity
compared to the wild-type. We also examined the importance of CsrA for A.
baumannii virulence. The ΔcsrA mutant strains had a greatly reduced ability to
kill Galleria mellonella larvae, could not replicate in G. mellonella hemolymph, 
and also had a growth defect in human serum. Together, these results show that
CsrA is essential for the growth of A. baumannii on host-derived substrates, and 
is involved in desiccation tolerance, implying that CsrA controls key functions
involved in the transmission of A. baumannii in hospitals.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00259-20 
PMID: 32989034 

