
1. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2020 Mar 4;9(1):45. doi:
10.1186/s13756-020-0705-1.

Oral colonisation by antimicrobial-resistant Gram-negative bacteria among
long-term care facility residents: prevalence, risk factors, and molecular
epidemiology.

Le MN(1)(2), Kayama S(1)(2)(3), Yoshikawa M(4), Hara T(1)(2)(5), Kashiyama
S(1)(2)(5), Hisatsune J(1)(2)(3), Tsuruda K(6), Onodera M(1)(5), Ohge H(1)(7),
Tsuga K(4), Sugai M(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Project Research Centre for Nosocomial Infectious Diseases, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Antimicrobial Resistance, Hiroshima University Graduate School
of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Antimicrobial Resistance Research Centre, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Higashi Murayama, Japan.
(4)Department of Advanced Prosthodontics, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.
(5)Clinical Laboratory, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Oral Epidemiology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hhiroshima, Japan.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hiroshima University Hospital, Hiroshima,
Japan.
(8)Project Research Centre for Nosocomial Infectious Diseases, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan. sugai@niid.go.jp.
(9)Department of Antimicrobial Resistance, Hiroshima University Graduate School
of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan. sugai@niid.go.jp.
(10)Antimicrobial Resistance Research Centre, National Institute of Infectious
Diseases, Higashi Murayama, Japan. sugai@niid.go.jp.

BACKGROUND: For residents of long-term care facilities (LTCFs),
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria (ARB) are a risk factor, yet their oral
colonisation, potentially leading to aspiration pneumonia, remains unclear. This 
study was undertaken to survey the prevalence, phenotypic characteristics, and
molecular epidemiology of antimicrobial-resistant Gram-negative bacteria in the
oral cavity of LTCF residents, and to analyse the risk factors for such carriers.
METHODS: This study involved 98 residents of a LTCF in Hiroshima City, Japan,
aged between 55 and 101 years. Oropharyngeal swabs were collected and plated on
screening media for ESBL-producing and carbapenem-resistant bacteria; isolates
were identified and tested for antibiotic susceptibility; biofilm formation was
tested in vitro; identification of epidemic clones were pre-determined by PCR;
resistance genes, sequence types, and whole-genome comparison of strains were
conducted using draft genome sequences. Demographic data and clinical
characterisations were collected and risk factors analysed.
RESULTS: Fifty-four strains from 38% of the residents grew on screening media and
comprised predominantly of Acinetobacter spp. (35%), Enterobacteriaceae spp.
(22%), and Pseudomonas spp. (19%). All Escherichia coli isolates carried
CTX-M-9 group and belonged to the phylogroup B2, O25:H4 ST131 fimH30 lineage. Six
Acinetobacter baumannii isolates presented identical molecular characteristics
and revealed more biofilm production than the others, strongly suggesting their
clonal lineage. One Acinetobacter ursingii isolate displayed extensive resistance
to various ß-lactams due to multiple acquired resistance genes. One Pseudomonas
aeruginosa isolate showed exceptional resistance to all ß-lactams including
carbapenems, aminoglycosides, and a new quinolone, showing a multidrug-resistant 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP) phenotype and remarkable biofilm formation. Genome 
sequence analysis revealed this isolate was the blaIMP-1-positive clone ST235 in 
Japan. Strokes (cerebral infarction or cerebral haemorrhage) and percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy tubes were recognised as risk factors for oral
colonisation by ARB in the LTCF residents.
CONCLUSIONS: ARB, as defined by growth on screening agar plates, which carried
mobile resistance genes or elements or conferred high biofilm formation, were
already prevalent in the oral cavity of LTCF residents. Health-care workers
involved in oral care should be aware of antimicrobial resistance and pay special
attention to transmission prevention and infection control measures to diminish
ARB or mobile resistance elements dissemination in LTCFs.

DOI: 10.1186/s13756-020-0705-1 
PMCID: PMC7057508
PMID: 32131899 

