
1. Med Sci Monit. 2020 Feb 4;26:e919680. doi: 10.12659/MSM.919680.

Effect of Neotype Rectal Mild Hypothermia Therapy on Intestinal Bacterial
Translocation in Rats with Hypoxic-Ischemic Brain Damage.

Liu P(1)(2), Deng X(1)(2), Peng Y(3), Zhou F(1)(2), Zuo Z(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU), Children's Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China (mainland).
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, China
International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child Development and
Critical Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics, Chongqing, China
(mainland).
(3)Department of Endoscopy Center, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China (mainland).

BACKGROUND Previous studies have shown that a neotype rectal cooling device can
induce mild hypothermia (MH) in Sprague-Dawley rats with ischemic-hypoxic brain
damage (HIBD) and inhibit cell apoptosis in the hippocampal CAl region, and does 
not cause damage to rectal tissues. The present study aimed to investigate the
effect of rectal MH on bacterial translocation (BT) in Sprague-Dawley rats with
HIBD. MATERIAL AND METHODS A total of 60 Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly
divided into 4 groups: a control group (group C), a normothermia group (group
NT), a cooling blanket group (group CB), and a rectal cooling group (group RC).
Rats in group CB and group RC received MH using a cooling blanket and rectal
cooling device after HIBD model establishment. Then, we measured diamine oxidase 
(DAO) and D-lactate level separately in groups NT, CB, and RC. Finally, the
spleen, liver, and mesenteric lymph nodes were collected for bacterial culture,
and rectal tissues were collected for H&E staining. RESULTS The therapeutic
outcome was better in Sprague-Dawley rats receiving rectal MH without rectal
injury compared to rats in group CB. Escherichia coli (E. coli) was found in MLNs
in group RC. E. coli, Proteus vulgaris, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and
Acinetobacter lwoffii were detected in the rats of groups CB and NT. At 12 h
following rectal MH, DAO and D-lactate levels were lower than in group NT.
CONCLUSIONS The neotype rectal MH cooling method could be a potential strategy to
induce rapid, controllable hypothermia, thus reducing the possibility of
inflammatory cell infiltration and BT incidence.

DOI: 10.12659/MSM.919680 
PMCID: PMC7020737
PMID: 32017761 

