
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Apr 1;86(8). pii: e02748-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02748-19. Print 2020 Apr 1.

ESKAPE Bacteria and Extended-Spectrum-β-Lactamase-Producing Escherichia coli
Isolated from Wastewater and Process Water from German Poultry Slaughterhouses.

Savin M(1), Bierbaum G(2), Hammerl JA(3), Heinemann C(4), Parcina M(2), Sib E(5),
Voigt A(5), Kreyenschmidt J(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Sciences, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany
m.savin@uni-bonn.de.
(2)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Parasitology, University
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department for Biological Safety, German Federal Institute for Risk
Assessment, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Animal Sciences, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(5)Institute for Hygiene and Public Health, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn,
Germany.
(6)Hochschule Geisenheim University, Department of Fresh Produce Logistics,
Geisenheim, Germany.

The wastewater of livestock slaughterhouses is considered a source of
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria with clinical relevance and may thus be
important for their dissemination into the environment. To get an overview of
their occurrence and characteristics, we investigated process water (n = 50) from
delivery and unclean areas as well as wastewater (n = 32) from the in-house
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) of two German poultry slaughterhouses
(slaughterhouses S1 and S2). The samples were screened for ESKAPE bacteria
(Enterococcus spp., Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter
baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Enterobacter spp.) and Escherichia coli Their 
antimicrobial resistance phenotypes and the presence of
extended-spectrum-β-lactamase (ESBL), carbapenemase, and mobilizable colistin
resistance genes were determined. Selected ESKAPE bacteria were epidemiologically
classified using different molecular typing techniques. At least one of the
target species was detected in 87.5% (n = 28/32) of the wastewater samples and
86.0% (n = 43/50) of the process water samples. The vast majority of the
recovered isolates (94.9%, n = 448/472) was represented by E. coli (39.4%), the
A. calcoaceticus-A. baumannii (ACB) complex (32.4%), S. aureus (12.3%), and K.
pneumoniae (10.8%), which were widely distributed in the delivery and unclean
areas of the individual slaughterhouses, including their wastewater effluents.
Enterobacter spp., Enterococcus spp., and P. aeruginosa were less abundant and
made up 5.1% of the isolates. Phenotypic and genotypic analyses revealed that the
recovered isolates exhibited diverse resistance phenotypes and β-lactamase genes.
In conclusion, wastewater effluents from the investigated poultry slaughterhouses
exhibited clinically relevant bacteria (E. coli, methicillin-resistant S. aureus,
K. pneumoniae, and species of the ACB and Enterobacter cloacae complexes) that
contribute to the dissemination of clinically relevant resistances (i.e., bla
CTX-M or bla SHV and mcr-1) in the environment.IMPORTANCE Bacteria from livestock
may be opportunistic pathogens and carriers of clinically relevant resistance
genes, as many antimicrobials are used in both veterinary and human medicine.
They may be released into the environment from wastewater treatment plants
(WWTPs), which are influenced by wastewater from slaughterhouses, thereby
endangering public health. Moreover, process water that accumulates during the
slaughtering of poultry is an important reservoir for livestock-associated
multidrug-resistant bacteria and may serve as a vector of transmission to
occupationally exposed slaughterhouse employees. Mitigation solutions aimed at
the reduction of the bacterial discharge into the production water circuit as
well as interventions against their further transmission and dissemination need
to be elaborated. Furthermore, the efficacy of in-house WWTPs needs to be
questioned. Reliable data on the occurrence and diversity of clinically relevant 
bacteria within the slaughtering production chain and in the WWTP effluents in
Germany will help to assess their impact on public and environmental health.

Copyright © 2020 Savin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02748-19 
PMCID: PMC7117925
PMID: 32033950 

