
1. Allergy. 2020 Sep;75(9):2342-2351. doi: 10.1111/all.14250. Epub 2020 Mar 17.

Contrasting microbiotas between Finnish and Estonian infants: Exposure to
Acinetobacter may contribute to the allergy gap.

Ruokolainen L(1), Parkkola A(2)(3), Karkman A(1)(4), Sinkko H(5)(6), Peet A(7),
Hämäläinen AM(8), von Hertzen L(9), Tillmann V(7), Koski K(10), Virtanen
SM(11)(12)(13), Niemelä O(14), Haahtela T(9), Knip M(2)(3)(13)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Pediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Research Program for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Human Microbiome (HUMI) Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Tartu University Hospital, University of Tartu,
Tartu, Estonia.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Jorvi Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital,
Espoo, Finland.
(9)Skin and Allergy Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(10)Clinicum, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(11)Department of Public Health Solutions, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.
(12)Faculty of Social Sciences/Health Sciences, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland.
(13)Center for Child Health Research, Tampere University Hospital and Science
Centre, Tampere University Hospital, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(14)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Research Unit, Seinäjoki
Central Hospital, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.
(15)Folkhälsan Research Center, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Allergic diseases are more common in Finland than in Estonia,
which-according to the biodiversity hypothesis-could relate to differences in
early microbial exposures.
METHODS: We aimed at defining possible microbial perturbations preceding early
atopic sensitization. Stool, nasal and skin samples of 6-month-old DIABIMMUNE
study participants with HLA susceptibility to type 1 diabetes were collected. We 
compared microbiotas of sensitized (determined by specific IgE results at
18 months of age) and unsensitized Estonian and Finnish children.
RESULTS: Sensitization was differentially targeted between populations, as
egg-specific and birch pollen-specific IgE was more common in Finland. Microbial 
diversity and community composition also differed; the genus Acinetobacter was
more abundant in Estonian skin and nasal samples. Particularly, the strain-level 
profile of Acinetobacter lwoffii was more diverse in Estonian samples. Early
microbiota was not generally associated with later sensitization. Microbial
composition tended to differ between children with or without IgE-related
sensitization, but only in Finland. While land-use pattern (ie green areas vs.
urban landscapes around the children's homes) was not associated with microbiota 
as a whole, it associated with the composition of the genus Acinetobacter.
Breastfeeding affected gut microbial composition and seemed to protect from
sensitization.
CONCLUSIONS: In accordance with the biodiversity hypothesis, our results support 
disparate early exposure to environmental microbes between Finnish and Estonian
children and suggest a significant role of the genus Acinetobacter in the allergy
gap between the two populations. The significance of the observed differences for
later allergic sensitization remains open.

© 2020 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.14250 
PMID: 32108360 

