
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 14;11:1918. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01918. eCollection 
2020.

Multidrug Resistant Acinetobacter Isolates Release Resistance Determinants
Through Contact-Dependent Killing and Bacteriophage Lysis.

Crippen CS(1), Jr MJR(2), Sanchez S(3), Szymanski CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Complex Carbohydrate Research Center,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States.
(2)United States National Poultry Research Center, Agricultural Research Service,
United States Department of Agriculture, Athens, GA, United States.
(3)Athens Veterinary Diagnostic Lab, Department of Infectious Diseases,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States.

Antimicrobial resistance is an ancient bacterial defense mechanism that has
rapidly spread due to the frequent use of antibiotics for disease treatment and
livestock growth promotion. We are becoming increasingly aware that pathogens,
such as members of the genus Acinetobacter, are precipitously evolving drug
resistances through multiple mechanisms, including the acquisition of antibiotic 
resistance genes. In this study, we isolated three multidrug resistant
Acinetobacter species from birds on a free-range farm. Acinetobacter
radioresistens, Acinetobacter lwoffii, and Acinetobacter johnsonii were isolated 
from hens, turkeys and ducks and were resistant to 14 clinically relevant
antibiotics, including several listed by the World Health Organization as
essential medicines. Co-culturing any of the three Acinetobacter species with
Acinetobacter baumannii resulted in contact-dependent release of intact
resistance determinants. We also isolated several lytic bacteriophages and
selected two of these phages to be included in this study based on differences in
plaquing characteristics, nucleic acid content and viral morphology. Both phages 
released host DNA, including antibiotic resistance genes during cell lysis and we
demonstrated that these resistance determinants were transferable to a naïve
strain of Escherichia coli. This study demonstrates that contact-dependent
competition between bacterial species can readily contribute to DNA release into 
the environment, including antibiotic resistance determinants. We also highlight 
that the constant lysis and turnover of bacterial populations during the natural 
lifecycle of a lytic bacteriophage is an underappreciated mechanism for the
liberation of DNA and subsequent genetic exchange.

Copyright © 2020 Crippen, Jr., Sanchez and Szymanski.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01918 
PMCID: PMC7456956
PMID: 32922376 

