
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2020 Jun;173:105937. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2020.105937. Epub 
2020 May 5.

A novel comprehensive efficacy test for textiles intended for use in the
healthcare setting.

Nicoloro JM(1), Wen J(2), Queiroz S(1), Sun Y(2), Goodyear N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Massachusetts
Lowell, Lowell, MA, USA. Electronic address: Nancy_Goodyear@uml.edu.

Soft surfaces, including textiles are found throughout healthcare settings.
Pathogens can survive for long periods of time on textiles, and can be
transferred to and from the skin. Antimicrobial fabrics are used as an
engineering control to prevent infection. Efficacy testing standards have
limitations, including single microorganism challenges, multiple fabric plies
tested, and lengthy contact times. We developed a novel method that better models
in-use conditions through testing standardized mixtures of pathogens and normal
skin microorganisms, artificial soils, and a 15-min contact time. Reproducible
growth of all microorganisms from frozen stocks was achieved using this method. A
novel rechargeable, monitorable N-halamine cotton cellulose fabric, containing
5885 ± 98 ppm of active chlorine, was evaluated with the new method using PBS,
artificial sweat, and artificial sweat plus 5% serum as soil. Pathogens tested
included Acinetobacter baumannii, Candida albicans, Escherichia coli,
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecalis, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus, methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Each was tested singly and in the presence of a representative normal
skin flora mixture, including: Acinetobacter lwoffii, Corynebacterium striatum,
Micrococcus luteus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis. When tested singly, all
microorganisms were reduced by 3.00 log10 or greater, regardless of artificial
soil. In mixture, 4.00 log10 or greater reductions were achieved for all
microorganisms. These results suggest that the novel testing method can be used
to provide more comprehensive and realistic efficacy information for
antimicrobial textiles intended for use in healthcare. Furthermore, the
N-halamine fabric demonstrated efficacy against multiple pathogens, singly and in
mixtures, regardless of the presence of artificial soils.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2020.105937 
PMID: 32387116 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

