
1. Mol Psychiatry. 2020 May 4. doi: 10.1038/s41380-020-0736-2. [Epub ahead of print]

Helicobacter pylori, periodontal pathogens, and their interactive association
with incident all-cause and Alzheimer's disease dementia in a large national
survey.

Beydoun MA(1), Beydoun HA(2), Weiss J(3), Hossain S(4), El-Hajj ZW(5), Zonderman 
AB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, National Institutes on
Aging, NIA/NIH/IRP, Baltimore, MD, USA. baydounm@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Fort Belvoir Community Hospital, Fort Belvoir, VA, USA.
(3)Population Studies Center and the Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Population Sciences, National Institutes on
Aging, NIA/NIH/IRP, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Co-infection between Helicobacter pylori (Hp) and groups of periodontal pathogens
may alter the onset of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and all-cause dementia. We
examined the interactive associations among Hp sero-positivity, periodontal
disease (Pd), and infections with incident AD and all-cause dementia, among older
adults (≥65 years at baseline). Up to 1431 participants from phase 1 of the
National Health and Nutrition Survey III (1988-1991) had complete data till
January 1st, 2014 on Hp sero-positivity with a mean follow-up of 10-11 years for 
AD and all-cause dementia incidence. Exposures consisted of 19 periodontal
pathogens, constructed factors and clusters, and two Pd markers- probing depth
and clinical attachment loss (CAL). Cox proportional hazards models were
performed. Around 55% of the selected sample was Hp+. We found that Prevotella
intermedia, Campylobacter Rectus, Factor 2 (Pi/Prevotella nigrescens/Prevotella
melaninogenica), and the Orange-Red cluster interacted synergistically with Hp
sero-positivity, particularly with respect to AD incidence. The presence of
higher levels of Actinomyces Naeslundii (An) enhanced the effect of being Hp+ on 
both AD and all-cause dementia incidence. In contrast, Fusobacterim nucleatum
(Fn), and Factor 1 (which included Fn), exhibited an antagonistic interaction
with Hp in relation to all-cause dementia. Both probing depth and CAL had direct 
associations with all-cause dementia among Hp+ individuals, despite
nonsignificant interaction. Selected periodontal pathogen titers, factors, and
clusters interacted mostly synergistically, with Hp sero-positivity, to alter the
risk of AD and all-cause dementia. Ultimately, a randomized controlled trial is
needed, examining effects of co-eradication of Hp and select periodontal
pathogens on neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-020-0736-2 
PMID: 32366948 

