
1. mSystems. 2019 Nov 5;4(6). pii: e00450-19. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00450-19.

Oral Microbiome Alterations Associated with Early Childhood Caries Highlight the 
Importance of Carbohydrate Metabolic Activities.

Wang Y(#)(1), Wang S(#)(1), Wu C(#)(2)(3), Chen X(1), Duan Z(1), Xu Q(3), Jiang
W(1), Xu L(1), Wang T(3), Su L(1), Wang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang J(1), Huang Y(3), 
Tong S(1), Zhou C(4), Deng S(5), Qin N(6)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontics, Affiliated Hospital of 
Stomatology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, Shanghai,
China.
(3)Realbio Genomics Institute, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, The
First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.
(5)Department of Conservative Dentistry and Periodontics, Affiliated Hospital of 
Stomatology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
dengshuli@zju.edu.cn qinnan001@126.com.
(6)Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University, Shanghai,
China dengshuli@zju.edu.cn qinnan001@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Globally, dental caries is the most prevalent chronic oral disease and affects
roughly half of all children. The aim of this report was to use metagenomic
analyses to investigate the relationship between the oral microbiome and caries
in preschool children. A total of 25 preschoolers, aged 3 to 5 years old with
severe early childhood caries (ECC), and 19 age-matched, caries-free children as 
controls were recruited. Saliva samples were collected from the participants and 
were subjected to metagenomic analyses, whereby the oral microbial communities
were investigated. The metagenomic analyses revealed substantial microbiota
differences between the two groups, indicating apparent shifts of the oral
microbiome present in the ECC group. At the species level, the ECC-enriched
microbes included Prevotella amnii, Shuttleworthia satelles, Olsenella uli, and
Anaeroglobus geminatus Interestingly, Actinomyces odontolyticus and Actinomyces
graevenitzii exhibited apparent differences at the strain level but not the
species level between the ECC and control groups. Functional examination showed
that the ECC group displayed extensive alterations in metabolic
genes/pathways/modules, including enriched functions in sugar metabolism.
Finally, an SVM (support vector machine) classifier comprising seven species was 
developed and generated a moderately good performance in predicting caries onset 
(area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUC] = 78.33%).
Together, these findings indicate that caries is associated with considerable
changes in the oral microbiome, some of which can potentially be exploited as
therapeutic targets or diagnostic markers. (This study has been registered at
ClinicalTrials.gov under registration no. NCT02341352.)IMPORTANCE Dental caries
is a highly prevalent oral disease that can lead to severe dental damage and may 
greatly compromise the quality of life of the affected individuals. Previous
studies, including those based on 16S rRNA gene, have revealed that the oral
microbiota plays a prominent role in development of the disease. But the approach
of those studies was limited in analyzing several key microbiome traits,
including species- or strain-level composition and functional profile. Here, we
performed metagenomic analyses for a cohort of preschool children with or without
caries. Our results showed that caries was associated with extensive microbiota
differences at various taxonomic and functional levels. Some caries-associated
species had not been previously reported, some of which may have significant
clinical implications. A microbiome gene catalogue from children with caries was 
constructed for the first time. The results demonstrated that caries is
associated with alterations of the oral microbiome, including changes in
microbial composition and metabolic functional profile.

Copyright © 2019 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00450-19 
PMCID: PMC6832018
PMID: 31690590 

