
1. Microbiologyopen. 2020 Sep 23:e1116. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.1116. [Epub ahead of
print]

The effect of sulfamonomethoxine treatment on the gut microbiota of Nile tilapia 
(Oreochromis niloticus).

Ming J(1)(2)(3), Fu Z(4), Ma Z(4), Zhou L(1), Zhang Z(5), Song C(3)(5), Yuan
X(3)(5), Wu Q(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Lake Science and Environment, Nanjing Institute of
Geography and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)Freshwater Fisheries Research Center of Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Wuxi, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of South China Sea Fishery Resources Exploitation & Utilization
of Ministry of Agriculture of China, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Fishery Ecology and Environment, South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University, Wuxi, China.

To investigate the possible effects of sulfamonomethoxine (SMM) on Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus), we quantitatively evaluated the microbial shifts in the 
intestines of Nile tilapia in response to different doses of SMM (200 and
300 mg/kg) using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. At the phylum level, the control group
(0 mg kg-1  SMM) was dominated by Actinobacteria, Proteobacteria, and Firmicutes.
In the treatment groups, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Chloroflexi were the
dominant phyla. Cluster analysis indicated that the two groups treated with SMM
clustered together. Similarly, the bacterial families that dominated the control 
group differed from those dominating the treatment groups. The changes in
intestinal microbial composition over time were similar between the two SMM
treatment groups. In both groups, the abundances of some families, including the 
Bacillaceae, Streptococcaceae, and Pseudomonadaceae, increased first and then
decreased. Overall, the addition of SMM to the feed changed the structure of the 
intestinal microbiota in Nile tilapia. This study improves our understanding of
the impact of SMM on the intestinal microenvironment of Nile tilapia. Our results
provide guidelines for the feasibility of SMM use in aquaculture production.

© 2020 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1116 
PMID: 32965800 

