
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Mar;70(3):2158-2162. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003961.

Conservation of the name Aeromonas eucrenophila over the name Aeromonas punctata 
for the organism based on type stain NCMB 74T and universally defined as
'Aeromonas DNA hybridization group 6'.

Farmer JJ(1), Holmes B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Enteric Reference Laboratory, Foodborne and Diarrheal Diseases Branch,
Division of Bacterial and Mycotic Diseases, National Center for Infectious
Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta,
Georgia 30333, USA.
(2)National Collection of Type Cultures,, Health Protection Agency, London NW9
5EQ, UK.

In a companion paper, we requested the Judicial Commission to correct the type
strain of Aeromonas punctata from ATCC 15468T to NCMB 74T (=ATCC 23309T).
Correction of this error on the 1980 Approved Lists by an Opinion of the Judicial
Commission will remove the status of the name Aeromonas caviae as a junior
objective synonym of A. punctata. This is important because the scientific
community continues to use the name A. caviae almost exclusively instead of A.
punctata. However, the corrective action of this Opinion will cause a new
problem. A. punctata and A. eucrenophila will then become objective synonyms
because both species will have the same type strain NCMB 74T, and A. punctata
would have priority because it was published first (1890 vs. 1987). Thus, A.
punctata rather than A. eucrenophila would become the correct name for DNA
hybridization group 6. A. punctata has had a very confusing history since it was 
first described as Bacillus punctatus by Zimmermann in 1890. It was without a
type strain for over 50 years, and unfortunately, has had an incorrect type
strain for some 40 years. The name A. punctata as a bacterial species has been
used incorrectly in the literature very frequently, either based on the wrong
type strain or with the wrong definition or circumscription. The name A. punctata
is not accepted or used by most specialists who study and publish scientific
papers and reviews on Aeromonas. Under the heading 'Rejection of Names' Rule 56a 
of the Bacterial Code states reasons why the Judicial Commission can reject a
name, the first is: '(1) An ambiguous name (nomen ambiguum), i.e., a name which
has been used with different meanings and thus has become a source of error'.
Rule 56a gives the Judicial Commission authority to place names on the list of
rejected names. Our analysis of its history leads us to state unequivocally that 
A. punctata currently is, and has been throughout the vast majority of its
history, an ambiguous name. After considering all the possible alternatives and
their consequences we request the Judicial Commission to go against the rules of 
priority; to invoke case (1) of Rule 56a, and issue an Opinion conserving A.
eucrenophila over A. punctata; and to place the name A. punctata on the list of
rejected names. We argue that these actions will give instant stability to a
complex and confusing situation by making A. eucrenophila rather than A. punctata
the correct name for 'Aeromonas DNA hybridization group 6', an association that
is almost universally accepted by the scientific community as reflected in the
literature.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003961 
PMID: 31935185  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

