
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Aug 14. doi: 10.4014/jmb.2005.05040. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Recent insights into Aeromonas salmonicida and its bacteriophages in aquaculture:
A comprehensive review.

Park SY(1)(2), Han JE(3), Kwon H(1), Park SC(4), Kim JH(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease Research Center, Republic of Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Animal and Dairy Sciences, College of Agriculture and Life
Science, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134, Republic of Republic of
Korea.
(3)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, 41566, Republic of Republic of Korea.
(4)Laboratory of Aquatic Biomedicine, College of Veterinary Medicine and Research
Institute for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826,
Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Biomolecular Science, KRIBB School of Bioscience, Republic of
Korea University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon 34113, Republic of
Korea.

The emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance in pathogenic bacteria of
fish and shellfish have caused serious concerns in the aquaculture industry,
owing to the potential health risks to humans and animals. Among those, Aeromonas
salmonicida, which is one of the most important primary pathogens in salmonids,
is responsible for significant economic losses in the global aquaculture
industry, especially in salmonid farming because of its severe infectivity and
acquisition of antimicrobial resistance. Therefore, interest in the use of
alternative approaches to prevent and control A. salmonicida infections has
increased in recent years, and several applications of bacteriophages (phages)
have provided promising results. For several decades, A. salmonicida and phages
infecting this fish pathogen have been thoroughly investigated in various
research areas including aquaculture. The general overview of phage usages to
control bacterial diseases in aquaculture, including the general advantages of
this strategy, has been clearly described in previous reviews. Therefore, this
review specifically focuses on providing insights into the phages infecting A.
salmonicida from basic research to biotechnological application in aquaculture,
as well as recent advances in the study of A. salmonicida.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.2005.05040 
PMID: 32807762 

