
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 Sep;104:470-477. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.05.059.
Epub 2020 Jun 22.

Two types of TNF-α and their receptors in snakehead (Channa argus): Functions in 
antibacterial innate immunity.

Cui ZW(1), Kong LL(2), Zhao F(3), Tan AP(1), Deng YT(1), Jiang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China; College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: zhaofei@prfri.ac.cn.

Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) is a pluripotent mediator of pro-inflammatory and
antimicrobial defense mechanisms and a regulator of lymphoid organ development.
Although two types of TNF-α have been identified in several teleost species,
their functions in pathogen infection remain largely unexplored, especially in
pathogen clearance. Herein, we cloned and characterized two types of TNF-α,
termed shTNF-α1 and shTNF-α2, and their receptors, shTNFR1 and shTNFR2, from
snakehead (Channa argus). These genes were constitutively expressed in all tested
tissues, and were induced by Aeromonas schubertii and Nocardia seriolae in head
kidney and spleen in vivo, and by lipoteichoic acid (LTA), lipopolysaccharides
(LPS), and Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [Poly (I:C)] in head kidney leukocytes
(HKLs) in vitro. Moreover, recombinant shTNF-α1 and shTNF-α2 upregulated the
expression of endogenous shTNF-α1, shTNF-α2, shTNFR1, and shTNFR2, and enhanced
intracellular bactericidal activity, with shTNF-α1 having a greater effect than
shTNF-α2. These findings suggest important roles of fish TNFα1, TNFα2, and their 
receptors in bacterial infection and pathogen clearance, and provide a new
insight into their function in antibacterial innate immunity.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.05.059 
PMID: 32585357 

