
1. Environ Entomol. 2020 Aug 29. pii: nvaa098. doi: 10.1093/ee/nvaa098. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Differences in Gut Bacterial Communities of Ips typographus (Coleoptera:
Curculionidae) Induced by Enantiomer-Specific α-Pinene.

Fang JX(1), Zhang SF(1), Liu F(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang FB(2), Guo XB(2), Zhang
Z(1), Zhang QH(3), Kong XB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Forest Protection of the National Forestry and Grassland
Administration of China, Research Institute of Forest Ecology, Environment and
Protection, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing, China.
(2)Forest Pest Control and Quarantine Station, Shangluo Forestry Bureau,
Shangluo, Shaanxi Province, China.
(3)Sterling International, Inc., Spokane, WA.

The spruce bark beetle (Ips typographus L.) is a destructive pest of Eurasian
spruce forests. Although the gut bacteria of this insect are considered to play
important roles in its lifecycle, the relationship between I. typographus and its
gut bacterial community is poorly characterized. In this study, 16S rRNA gene
sequencing was used to determine gut bacterial community composition across
successive I. typographus life stages. Responses of the gut bacteria to α-pinene 
enantiomers were also explored. Ips typographus gut bacterial populations were
dominated by the phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and
Actinobacteria, and the relative abundance of these phyla varied across different
developmental stages of the beetle. Bacterial species diversity and richness
indices increased with developmental stage progression. Relative abundances of
the dominant genera, Erwinia (Enterobacteriales: Enterobacteriaceae),
Pseudoxanthomonas (Xanthomonadales: Xanthomonadaceae), Serratia
(Enterobacteriales: Enterobacteriaceae), and Romboutsia (Clostridiales:
Peptostreptococcaceae), also varied across successive I. typographus life stages.
Large disparities in the gut bacterial community of male adults were observed
when the beetles were treated with S-(-)-α-pinene and R-(+)-α-pinene. The
relative abundances of Lactococcus (Lactobacillales: Streptococcaceae) and
Lelliottia (Enterobacteriales: Enterobacteriaceae) increased drastically with
R-(+)-α-pinene and S-(-)-α-pinene treatment, respectively. This indicated a
distinct enantiomer-specific effect of α-pinene on the I. typographus gut
bacteria. This study demonstrated the plasticity of gut bacteria during I.
typographus development, when α-pinene host monoterpenes are encountered. This
study provides new insights into the relationship between 'I. typographus-gut
bacteria' symbionts and host trees.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Entomological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ee/nvaa098 
PMID: 32860052 

