
1. J Adv Vet Anim Res. 2019 Dec 20;7(1):83-91. doi: 10.5455/javar.2020.g397.
eCollection 2020 Mar.

Screening of antibiotic resistance genes in pathogenic bacteria isolated from
tiny freshwater shrimp (Macrobrachium lanchesteri) and "Kung Ten", the uncooked
Thai food.

Thongkao K(1), Sudjaroen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Science, Faculty of Science and Technology, Suan
Sunandha Rajabhat University, Bangkok 10300, Thailand.

Objective: This study aimed to isolate and identify of pathogenic bacteria in
tiny freshwater shrimp (Macrobrachium lanchesteri) and in Kung Ten, which is an
unusual Thai cuisine that eaten alive shrimp directly. Antimicrobial
susceptibility test and identification of antibiotic resistance genes for
isolated bacteria were conducted.
Materials and Methods: Eighty of fresh shrimp samples and forty of Kung Ten
salads were collected from four fresh markets, which were located in Bangkok and 
Nonthaburi province (N = 120). The isolation, identification, and antimicrobial
susceptibility test of pathogenic bacteria were done following the Clinical and
Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines. Antibiotic-resistant bacteria were
screened for β-lactamase relating genes, such as AmpC (MOX and ACC genes), bla
CTX-M, and Int1 genes.
Results: The number of bacterial isolates in tiny freshwater shrimp and Kung Ten 
salad was 136 and 65, respectively. Aeromonas caviae, A. hydrophilla, Proteus
penneri, Proteus vulgaris, and Klebsiella pneumoniae were commonly found.
Ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanic, cefuroxime, tetracycline, and
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole resistance were observed, and common
antibiotic-resistant bacteria were A. caviae, P. vulgaris, Enterobacter
Aerogenes, and K. pneumoniae. A. caviae, P. penneri, K. Pneumoniae, and A.
hydrophilla were positive for MOX gene; bla CTX-M, and Int1 genes; ACC and Int1
genes; and ACC gene, respectively.
Conclusion: Raw or uncooked shrimps in Kung Ten salad may a risk in foodborne
diseases due to positive for pathogenic bacterial isolates. However, hygienic
control on food preparation is difficult to apply because of the difficulty of
changing in local Thai food behavior.

Copyright: © Journal of Advanced Veterinary and Animal Research.

DOI: 10.5455/javar.2020.g397 
PMCID: PMC7096105
PMID: 32219114 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.

