
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Sep 25. pii: AEM.01575-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01575-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Longitudinal metatranscriptomic analysis of a meat spoilage microbiome detects
abundant continued fermentation and environmental stress responses during shelf
life and beyond.

Hultman J(1), Johansson P(1), Björkroth J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Hygiene and Environmental Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Helsinki, Agnes Sjöbergin katu 2, 00014 Helsinki
University, Finland.

Microbial food spoilage is a complex phenomenon associated with the succession of
the specific spoilage organisms (SSO) over the course of time. We performed a
longitudinal metatranscriptomic study on one modified atmosphere packaged (MAP)
beef product to increase understanding of the longitudinal behavior of a spoilage
microbiome during shelf life and onward. Based on the annotation of the mRNA
reads, we recognized three stages related to the active microbiome that were
descriptive for the sensory quality of the beef: acceptable product (AP), early
spoilage (ES) and late spoilage (LS). Both the 16S RNA taxonomic assignments from
the total RNA and functional annotations of the active genes showed that these
stages were significantly different from each other. However, the functional gene
annotations showed more pronounced difference than the taxonomy assignments.
Psychrotrophic lactic acid bacteria (LAB) formed the core of the SSO according to
the transcribed reads. Leuconostoc species were the most abundant active LAB
throughout the study period, whereas the transcription activity of
Streptococcaceae (mainly Lactococcus) increased after the product was spoiled. In
the beginning of the experiment, the community managed environmental stress by
cold-shock responses which were followed by the expression of the genes involved 
in managing oxidative stress. Glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway and pyruvate 
metabolism were active throughout the study at a relatively stable level.
However, the proportional transcription activity of the enzymes in these pathways
changed over time.ImportanceIt is generally known which organisms are the typical
SSO in foods, whereas the actively transcribed genes and pathways during
microbial succession are poorly understood. This knowledge is important since
better approaches to food quality evaluation and shelf life determination are
needed. Thus, we conducted this study to find longitudinal markers that are
connected to quality deterioration in a MAP beef product. These kind of RNA
markers could be used to develop novel type of rapid quality analysis tools in
the future. New tools are needed since even though SSO can be detected and their 
concentrations determined using the current microbiological methods, results from
these analyses cannot predict how close timewise a spoilage community is from
production of clear sensory defects. Main reason for this is that the species
composition of a spoilage community does not change dramatically during late
shelf life, whereas the ongoing metabolic activities lead to the development of
notable sensory deterioration.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01575-20 
PMID: 32978125 

