
1. Acta Vet Scand. 2020 Jan 23;62(1):6. doi: 10.1186/s13028-020-0504-y.

Motile aeromonads from farmed and wild freshwater fish in northern Italy: an
evaluation of antimicrobial activity and multidrug resistance during 2013 and
2016.

Borella L(1), Salogni C(1), Vitale N(1), Scali F(1), Moretti VM(2), Pasquali
P(3), Alborali GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale della Lombardia e dell'Emilia Romagna
"Bruno Ubertini", Via Bianchi 9, 25124, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Milan, Via dell'Università 6,
26900, Lodi, Italy. vittorio.moretti@unimi.it.
(3)Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial resistant bacteria are emerging biological contaminants
of the environment. In aquatic ecosystems, they originate mainly from hospitals, 
livestock manure and private households sewage water, which could contain
antimicrobial agents and resistant microorganisms. Aeromonas spp. occur
ubiquitously in aquatic environments and they cause disease in fish. Motile
aeromonads are also associated with human gastrointestinal and wound infections
and fish can act as a transmission route of antimicrobial resistance (AMR)
aeromonads to humans. The environmental ubiquity, the natural susceptibility to
antimicrobials and the zoonotic potential of Aeromonas spp. make them optimal
candidates for studying the AMR in aquatic ecosystems.
RESULTS: The AMR patterns of 95 motile aeromonads isolated from freshwater fish
during 2013 and 2016 were analyzed. All samples from fish came from farms and
natural water bodies located in northern Italy, which is an area characterized by
high anthropic impact on the environment. The isolates were biochemically
identified as Aeromonas hydrophila, Aeromonas sobria or Aeromonas caviae and AMR 
was determined by the standard disk diffusion method. All isolates were resistant
to cloxacillin, spiramycin and tilmicosin. High AMR frequencies (> 95%) were
detected for tylosin, penicillin and sulfadiazine. AMR to danofloxacin,
enrofloxacin, flumequine, ceftiofur, aminosidine, colistin, doxycycline,
gentamicin, marbocyl and florfenicol was observed at low levels (< 10%). No AMR
to cefquinome was found. Logistic regression showed several differences in
antimicrobial activity between complexes. According to the source of aeromonads, 
only few differences in AMR between isolates from farmed and wild fish were
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed an increasing trend of AMR to neomycin and
apramycin among Aeromonas isolates during the study period, while resistance to
erythromycin, tetracycline and thiamphenicol decreased. All isolates were
multidrug resistance (MDR), but A. caviae showed the highest number of MDR per
isolate. In most isolates, various degrees of MDR were detected to macrolides,
quinolones, fluoroquinolones, polymyxins and cephalosporins (third and fourth
generations), which are listed, by the World Health Organisation, to be among the
highest priority and critically important antimicrobials in human medicine. Our
findings underlined that freshwater fish can act as potential source of MDR
motile aeromonads. Due to their zoonotic potential, this can pose serious threat 
to human health.

DOI: 10.1186/s13028-020-0504-y 
PMCID: PMC6979286
PMID: 31973764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

