
1. Foodborne Pathog Dis. 2020 Sep 25. doi: 10.1089/fpd.2019.2780. [Epub ahead of
print]

Rapid Fulminant Progression and Mortality Secondary to Aeromonas dhakensis
Septicemia with Hepatitis B Virus Infection Following the Ingestion of Snakehead 
Fish in Mainland China: A Case Report.

Huang M(1), Chen H(2), Li C(1), Liu Y(2), Gan C(1), El-Sayed Ahmed MAE(3)(4)(5), 
Liu R(6), Shen C(3)(4), Zhong R(3)(4), Tian GB(3)(4), Huang X(7), Xia J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen
University, Zhuhai, China.
(2)Clinical Laboratory, Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Zhuhai, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Tropical Diseases Control (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry
of Education, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
and Drug Manufacturing, Misr University for Science and Technology (MUST), Cairo,
6th of October City, Egypt.
(6)United Laboratory of the Fifth Affiliated Hospital and BGI, Department of
Experimental Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center of
Molecular Imaging, Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhuhai,
China.
(7)Program of Pathobiology and Immunology, Fifth Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China.

Aeromonas dhakensis is an important ubiquitous Gram-negative and freshwater
bacterium detected in different reservoirs. It can cause invasive diseases in
humans. Herein, we report the first case in Mainland China of a fulminant death
of a 29-year-old man as a result of a new, unexpected association between
septicemic A. dhakensis and hepatitis B viral infection (HBV). Herein, the
patient died from multiple organ failure 5 d postadmission after the ingestion of
Snakehead Fish meal. The isolated bacterium was initially misidentified as
Aeromonas hydrophila using VITEK-2, while whole-genome sequencing (WGS) revealed 
that the isolate is A. dhakensis. WGS revealed the occurrence of three
antimicrobial genes of resistance: imiH, cphA2, and blaOXA-12; besides, major
virulence factors were detected. In silico, multilocus sequence typing (MLST)
showed that our A. dhakensis 17FW001 belonged to a novel sequence type (ST557). A
comparative genomic analysis of our isolate with nine selected Aeromonas species 
was done, which elucidated the pathogenicity of our A. dhakensis. In conclusion, 
we reported for the first time the association between A. dhakensis and HBV in
Mainland China. We revealed that septicemic A. dhakensis could result in severe
adverse clinical outcomes that end up with unexpected fulminant death especially 
when it is accompanied with HBV and sheds light on the virulence of A. dhakensis 
and the high rate of its misdiagnosis that requires to urgently consider
screening of all cases of A. dhakensis for HBV in the future. Besides, caution
should be taken while dealing with snakeheads which act as a vector for A.
dhakensis.

DOI: 10.1089/fpd.2019.2780 
PMID: 32985901 

