
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 May 25;10:239. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00239.
eCollection 2020.

SmpB and tmRNA Orchestrate Purine Pathway for the Trimethoprim Resistance in
Aeromonas veronii.

Wang D(1)(2), Li H(1), Khan WU(2), Ma X(1), Tang H(1), Tang Y(1), Huang D(2), Liu
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Biological Resources of Ministry of Education,
School of Life and Pharmaceutical Science, Hainan University, Haikou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Tropical Bioresource, College of
Tropical Crops Hainan University, Haikou, China.

Small protein B(SmpB) cooperates with transfer-messenger RNA (tmRNA) for
trans-translation to ensure the quality control of protein synthesis in
prokaryotes. Furthermore, they regulate cell metabolism separately. According to 
research, SmpB functions as a transcription factor, and tmRNA acts as a small
RNA. Purine pathway has been reported to be related to trimethoprim resistance,
including hypoxanthine synthesis, adenosine metabolism and guanosine metabolism. 
Another reason of drug tolerance is the efflux pump of the bacterium. In
transcriptomic data, it was shown that the expression of some related enzymes in 
adenosine metabolism were raised significantly in smpB deletion strain than that 
of wild type, which led to the differential trimethoprim resistance of Aeromonas 
veronii (A. veronii). Furthermore, the metabolic products of adenosine AMP, cAMP,
and deoxyadenosine were accumulated significantly. However, the expressions of
the enzymes related to hypoxanthine synthesis and guanosine metabolism were
elevated significantly in ssrA (small stable RNA, tmRNA) deletion strain, which
eventually caused an augmented metabolic product xanthine. In addition, the
deletion of ssrA also affected the significant downregulations of efflux pump
acrA/acrB. The minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were overall decreased
after the trimethoprim treatment to the wild type, ΔsmpB and ΔssrA. And the
difference in sensitivity between ΔsmpB and ΔssrA was evident. The MIC of ΔsmpB
was descended significantly than those of wild type and ΔssrA in M9 medium
supplemented with 1 mM adenosine, illustrating that the adenosine metabolism
pathway was principally influenced by SmpB. Likewise, the strain ΔssrA conferred 
more sensitivity than wild type and ΔsmpB in M9 medium supplemented with 1mM
guanosine. By overexpressing acrA/acrB, the tolerance to trimethoprim was
partially recovered in ΔssrA. These results revealed that SmpB and tmRNA acted on
different branches in purine metabolism, conferring the diverse trimethoprim
resistance to A. veronii. This study suggests that the trans-translation system
might be an effective target in clinical treatment of A. veronii and other
multi-antibiotic resistance bacteria with trimethoprim.

Copyright © 2020 Wang, Li, Khan, Ma, Tang, Tang, Huang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00239 
PMCID: PMC7270562
PMID: 32547961 

