
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 Sep 10. pii: S1050-4648(20)30628-8. doi:
10.1016/j.fsi.2020.09.012. [Epub ahead of print]

Fish IKKα from Japanese eel (Anguilla japonica) can activate NF-κB, AP1, and type
I IFN signaling pathways.

Feng J(1), Xu Y(2), Lin P(2), Wang Y(2), Zhang Z(3), Zou P(2), Peng X(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, Xiamen, 361021, Fujian Province,
China; Engineer Research Center of Eel Modern Industry Technology, Ministry of
Education, China. Electronic address: Fengjj@jmu.edu.cn.
(2)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, Xiamen, 361021, Fujian Province,
China; Engineer Research Center of Eel Modern Industry Technology, Ministry of
Education, China.
(3)College of Animal Science, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou,
350002, China.

Inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit alpha (IKKα) plays a pivotal
role in the activation of nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) pathway in response to
pathogens infections in mammals, but the information about IKKα in the regulation
of immune responses is still limited in teleost fishes. In the present study, the
full-length cDNA of an IKKα homologue, AjIKKα, was cloned by 5' and 3' SMART RACE
from Japanese eel, and its characteristics of expression in response to various
PAMPs and A. hydrophila infection were investigated both in vivo and in vitro
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). In addition,
the subcellular localization of AjIKKα GFP fusion protein and the induction of
AjIKKα in the activation of NF-κB, type I IFN and AP1 performed using Dual-Glo
luciferase assay system were also detected. Sequence comparison analysis revealed
that AjIKKα has typical conserved domains, including an N-terminal kinase domain,
an ubiquitin-like domain, a scaffold dimerization domain, and a C-terminal
NEMO-binding domain. The predicted three-dimensional structure of AjIKKα is
similar to that of human IKKα. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) analysis revealed a broad expression for AjIKKα in a wide range of
tissues, with the highest expression in the liver, followed by the intestine,
gills, and spleen, and with a lower expression in the muscle and heart. The
AjIKKα expressions in the liver and kidney were significantly induced following
injection with the viral mimic poly I:C and Aeromonas hydrophila infection,
whereas the bacterial mimic LPS down-regulated the expression of AjIKKα in the
spleen. In vitro, the AjIKKα transcripts of Japanese eel liver cells were
significantly enhanced by the treatment of LPS, poly I:C, CpG-DNA, and PGN or the
stimulation of different concentration of Aeromonas hydrophila (1 × 106 cfu/mL,
1 × 107 cfu/mL, and 1 × 108 cfu/mL). Luciferase assays demonstrated that AjIKKα
expression could significantly induce NF-κB, AP-1 and type I IFN promoter
activation in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, subcellular localization
studies showed that AjIKKα was evenly distributed in the cytoplasm in the natural
state, but AjIKKα was found to aggregate into spots in the cytoplasm after the
stimulation of LPS and poly I:C. These results collectively indicated that AjIKKα
plays an important role in innate immunity of host against antibacterial and
antiviral infection likely via the activation of NF-κB, AP1and type I IFN
signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.09.012 
PMID: 32920202 

