
1. Equine Vet J. 2020 Sep 13. doi: 10.1111/evj.13350. [Epub ahead of print]

Outbreak of acute larval cyathostominosis - A "perfect storm" of inflammation and
dysbiosis.

Walshe N(1), Mulcahy G(1)(2), Crispie F(3)(4), Cabrera-Rubio R(3), Cotter
P(3)(4)(5), Jahns H(1), Duggan V(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Conway Institute of Biomedical and Biomolecular Research, University College
Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Teagasc Food Research Centre, APC Microbiome, Moorepark, Fermoy, Ireland.
(4)APC Microbiome Ireland, Ireland.
(5)Vistamilk, Moorepark, Fermoy, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Cyathostomins are prevalent and pathogenic intestinal helminths of
horses, causing acute and chronic disease, including acute larval
cyathostominosis, which has a mortality rate of 50%. Factors determining
individual susceptibility to acute larval cyathostominosis are unknown.
Investigation of these factors could lead to novel treatment and prevention
strategies.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate clinicopathologic and faecal microbiota changes
associated with disease in individual horses in an acute larval cyathostominosis 
outbreak.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
METHODS: The study population was a herd of 23 mixed breed horses in Ireland. The
outbreak occurred in November 2018. Fourteen horses were clinically affected.
Clinical status was monitored and recorded. Blood and faecal sampling allowed
clinicopathologic, faecal 16s rRNA gene sequencing and faecal egg count analyses.
RESULTS: Two horses were euthanised, whilst 12 recovered. Common clinical signs
included loose faecal consistency, weight loss and pyrexia. Consistent
clinicopathologic findings were borderline anaemia, leucocytosis, thrombocytosis,
hyperfibrinogenaemia, hyperglobulinaemia and a reverse A: G ratio. Decreased
alpha-diversity of the faecal microbiota and greater relative abundance of the
genus Streptococcus, class Bacilli, order Lactobacillales and family
Streptococcaceae, and family Prevotelleceae was found in clinically affected
horses compared to their clinically normal cohorts. An increase in obligate
fibrolytic bacteria was seen in the clinically normal group compared to the
clinical group. Histopathological findings of the colon and caecum revealed a
severe necrotising typhlocolitis associated with cyathostomin larvae and
bacterial overgrowth in the mucosa of the large intestine.
MAIN LIMITATIONS: The study population in this outbreak is small. There are
several confounding factors limiting this to a descriptive case series. Faecal
microbiota has been shown to reflect the large intestinal microbiota but do not
represent changes directly.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that acute larval cyathostominosis is
associated with dysbiosis of the gut microbiota as well as the inflammatory
stimulus of numerous emerging larvae leading to structural and functional
pathology of the large intestine.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/evj.13350 
PMID: 32920897 

