
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 May;100:309-316. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.03.022.
Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Bacteria-induced IL-1β and its receptors in snakehead (Channa argus): Evidence
for their involvement in antibacterial innate immunity.

Cui ZW(1), Kong LL(2), Zhao F(3), Tan AP(1), Deng YT(1), Jiang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China; College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Fishery Drug Development of Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Immune Technology of Guangdong
Province, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery
Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: zhaofei@prfri.ac.cn.

As a central pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-1β (IL-1β) plays critical
roles in the inflammatory response, pathogen infection, and immunological
challenges in mammals. Although fish IL-1β has been confirmed to participate in
inflammatory response to pathogen infection, few studies have been performed to
characterize the antibacterial and bactericidal functions of fish IL-1β. In this 
study, snakehead (Channa argus) IL-1β (shIL-1β) and its receptors, shIL-1R1 and
shIL-1R2, were cloned and functionally characterized. ShIL-1β contained the IL-1 
family signature domain, and a potential cutting site at Asp96 that presented in 
all vertebrate IL-1β sequences. ShIL-1R1 had three extracellular IG-like domains 
and one intracellular signal TIR domain, while shIL-1R2 had three extracellular
IG-like domain but lacked the intracellular signal TIR domain. ShIL-1β, shIL-1R1,
and shIL-1R2 were constitutively expressed in all tested tissues, and their
expressions could be induced by Aeromonas schubertii and Nocardia seriolae in the
head kidney and spleen in vivo, and by LTA, LPS, and Poly (I:C) in head kidney
leukocytes (HKLs) in vitro. Moreover, recombinant shIL-1β upregulated the
expression of endogenous shIL-1β, shIL-R1, and shIL-R2 in snakehead HKLs, and
enhanced intracellular bactericidal activity. Taken together, this study found
that, like IL-1β and its receptors in mammals, shIL-1β and its receptors play
crucial roles in antibacterial innate immunity. This provides new insight into
the evolution of IL-1β function in vertebrates.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.03.022 
PMID: 32173451 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
have no conflicting commercial or financial interest in publishing this paper.

