
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2020 Aug 26;20(1):629. doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-05324-9.

Human papillomavirus infection and cervical intraepithelial neoplasia progression
are associated with increased vaginal microbiome diversity in a Chinese cohort.

Chen Y(1)(2)(3), Qiu X(1)(2)(3), Wang W(1)(2)(3), Li D(1)(2)(3), Wu A(1)(2)(3),
Hong Z(1)(2)(3), Di W(4)(5)(6), Qiu L(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Ren ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. diwen163@163.com.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Ren ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. diwen163@163.com.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. diwen163@163.com.
(7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. lilyqiulh@126.com.
(8)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Ren ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. lilyqiulh@126.com.
(9)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Ren ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China. lilyqiulh@126.com.

BACKGROUND: In this study, the association between human papillomavirus (HPV)
infection and related cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) or cervical cancer
and vaginal microbiome was evaluated in Chinese cohorts.
METHODS: The vaginal bacterial composition of five groups, HPV-infected women
without CINs (HPV, n = 78), women with low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions
(LSIL, n = 51), women with high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL,
n = 23), women with invasive cervical cancer (Cancer, n = 9) and healthy women
without HPV infection (Normal, n = 68), was characterized by deep sequencing of
barcoded 16S rRNA gene fragments (V3-4) using Illumina MiSeq.
RESULTS: HPV infection increased vaginal bacterial richness and diversity
regardless of the status of CINs. The vaginal bacterial richness and diversity
were further augmented in women with cervical cancer. Lactobacillus was the most 
abundant genus in all groups. HPV infection had a negative influence on the
abundances of Lactobacillus, Gardnerella and Atopobium. Accordingly, HPV
infection increased the relative abundance of Prevotella, Bacillus, Anaerococcus,
Sneathia, Megasphaera, Streptococcus and Anaerococcus. The increased proportions 
of Bacillus, Anaerococcus and the reduced abundance of Gradnerella vaginalis were
probably related with the progression of CINs severity. HPV infection without
CINs or cancerous lesions was strongly associated with Megasphaera. The most
abundant bacterium in the LSIL group was Prevotella amnii. However, Prevotella
timonensis, Shuttleworthia and Streptococcaceae at the family level were three
taxa related to HSIL. Furthermore, more taxa were associated with the Cancer
group including Bacillus, Sneathia, Acidovorax, Oceanobacillus profundus,
Fusobacterium, Veillonellaceae at the family level, Anaerococcus and
Porphyromonas uenonis. Samples in the Normal group were mostly assigned to CST
III. HPV infection converted the vaginal bacterial community structure from CST
III to CST IV. Furthermore, the proportions of CST IV were gradually augmented
with the progression of the severity of CINs.
CONCLUSIONS: This work interpreted the differential vaginal bacteria under HPV
infection and various precancerous or cancerous lesions in a Chinese cohort. We
distinguished the specific microbes and the vaginal bacterial structure that were
related with the progression of CINs severity in Chinese women.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-020-05324-9 
PMCID: PMC7449047
PMID: 32842982  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

