
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 Oct;105:378-392. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.06.051.
Epub 2020 Jun 29.

Effective isolation of GALT cells: Insights into the intestine immune response of
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) to different bacterin vaccine preparations.

Attaya A(1), Secombes CJ(2), Wang T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK. Electronic address: ahmed_attaya@uml.edu.
(2)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK. Electronic address:
christopher.secombes@abdn.ac.uk.
(3)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, AB24 2TZ, UK. Electronic address: t.h.wang@abdn.ac.uk.

The teleost gut is a multifunction complex structure that plays a pivotal
immunological role in homeostasis and the maintenance of health, in addition to
digestion of food and/or nutrient absorption. In vitro examination of the
intestine leucocyte repertoire has the potential to aid our understanding of gut 
immune competence and allows a rapid screen of host-microorganism interactions in
different immunological contexts. To explore this possibility, in the present
study we investigated the response of isolated gut leucocytes to 4 bacterins of
Aeromonas salmonicida, prepared from different strains, combinations and strains 
grown in different environments, in comparison to a Yersinia ruckeri bacterin for
which a commercial/effective oral booster vaccine has been developed. To aid this
study we also optimized further our method of GALT cell isolation from rainbow
trout, so as to avoid mechanical clearance of the intestine contents. This
drastically increased the cell yield from ~12 × 106 to ~210 × 106/fish with no
change in the percent cell viability over time or presence of transcripts typical
of the key leucocyte types needed for the study of immune modulation (i.e. T- and
B-cells, dendritic cells and macrophages). A wide array of immune transcripts
were modulated by the bacterins, demonstrating the diversity of GALT cell
responses to bacterial stimulation. Indeed, the GALT leucocyte responses were
sensitive enough to distinguish the different bacterial species, strains and
membrane proteins, as seen by distinct kinetics of immune gene expression.
However, the response of the GALT cells was often relatively slow and of a low
magnitude compared to those of PBL. These results enhance our knowledge of the
gut biocapacity and help validate the use of this model for screening of oral
vaccine candidates.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.06.051 
PMID: 32615166 

