
1. Bone. 2020 Sep 21:115652. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115652. [Epub ahead of print]

Assessing causal relationship from gut microbiota to heel bone mineral density.

Ni JJ(1), Yang XL(2), Zhang H(1), Xu Q(3), Wei XT(3), Feng GJ(3), Zhao M(1), Pei 
YF(4), Zhang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Medical College of Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China; Center for
Genetic Epidemiology and Genomics, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou University,
Yangzhou University, Jiangsu, PR China; Laboratory of Gastroenterology,
Affiliated Hospital of Yangzhou University, Yangzhou University, Jiangsu, PR
China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Medical College of Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China; Department of
Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Medical College of Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China; Department of
Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China. Electronic address: ypei@suda.edu.cn.
(5)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Medical College of Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China; Center for
Genetic Epidemiology and Genomics, School of Public Health, Medical College of
Soochow University, Jiangsu, PR China. Electronic address: lzhang6@suda.edu.cn.

Recent studies have demonstrated the important role played by gut microbiota in
regulating bone development, but the evidence of such causal relationship is
still sparse in human population. The aim of this study is to assess the causal
relationship from gut microbiota to bone development and to identify specific
causal bacteria taxa via a Mendelian randomization (MR) approach. A genome-wide
association study (GWAS) summary statistic based two-sample MR analysis was
performed. Summary statistics of microbiome GWAS (MGWAS) in 1126 twin pairs of
the TwinsUK study was used as discovery sample, and the MGWAS in 984 Dutch
participants from the LifeLines-DEEP cohort was used as replication sample.
Estimated heel bone mineral density (eBMD) GWAS in 426,824 participants from the 
UK biobank (UKB) cohort was used as outcome. Bacteria were grouped into taxa
features at both order and family levels. In the discovery sample, a total of 25 
bacteria features including 9 orders and 16 families were analyzed. Fourteen
features (5 orders + 9 families) were nominally significant, including 5 orders
(Bacteroidales, Clostridiales, Lactobacillales, Pasteurellales and
Verrucomicrobiales) and 9 families (Bacteroidaceae, Clostridiaceae,
Lachnospiraceae, Mogibacteriaceae, Pasteurellaceae, Porphyromonadaceae,
Streptococcaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae and Veillonellaceae). One order
Clostridiales and its child taxon, family Lachnospiraceae, were successfully
replicated in the replication sample (Clostridiales
Pdiscovery = 3.32 × 10-3Preplication = 7.29 × 10-3; Lachnospiraceae
Pdiscovery = 0.03 Preplication = 7.29 × 10-3). Our findings provided evidence of 
causal relationship from microbiota to bone development, as well as identified
specific bacteria taxa that regulated bone mass variation, thus providing new
insights into the microbiota mediated bone development mechanism.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115652 
PMID: 32971307 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
state that there is no conflict of interest.

