
1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2020 Sep 19. pii: S1050-4648(20)30646-X. doi:
10.1016/j.fsi.2020.09.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Potential influence of jaggery-based biofloc technology at different C:N ratios
on water quality, growth performance, innate immunity, immune-related genes
expression profiles, and disease resistance against Aeromonas hydrophila in Nile 
tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus).

Elayaraja S(1), Mabrok M(2), Algammal A(3), Sabitha E(4), Rajeswari MV(5),
Zágoršek K(6), Ye Z(7), Zhu S(8), Rodkhum C(9).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China; Fish Infectious Diseases Research Unit (FID RU), Department of
Veterinary Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University,
Bangkok, Thailand; Technical University of Liberec, Liberec, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: elayabact@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Fish Diseases and Management, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Suez Canal University, Egypt.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, Mycology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Egypt.
(4)Fish Infectious Diseases Research Unit (FID RU), Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(5)Center for Ocean Research, Institute of Science and Technology, Sathyabama
University, Chennai, India.
(6)Technical University of Liberec, Liberec, Czech Republic.
(7)College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China.
(8)College of Biosystems Engineering and Food Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: zhusm@edu.cn.
(9)Fish Infectious Diseases Research Unit (FID RU), Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok,
Thailand. Electronic address: channarong_r@yahoo.com.

Biofloc technology is increasingly becoming the most promising aquaculture tool
especially in places where water is scarce and the land is very expensive. The
dynamics of water quality, as well as plankton and microbial abundance, are
collectively necessary for successful fish farming. The prospective use of
jaggery as a potential carbon source and its influence on water quality, growth
performance, innate immunity, serum bactericidal capacity, and disease resistance
to Aeromonas hydrophila was investigated in Oreochromis niloticus. A completely
randomized design was used in triplicates, where the control group was reared in 
a water system with no carbon source, while T1, T2, and T3 groups were raised in 
biofloc systems at C:N ratios of C:N12, C:N15, and C:N20, respectively. Water
specimens were collected daily and fortnightly, while blood, serum, and head
kidneys were collected at 75 days of experimental period for further analysis.
TAN, nitrite, and ammonia values were considerably reduced, while the TSS values 
elevated significantly in all treated groups compared to the control.
Jaggery-based biofloc system (JB-BFT) has a pronounced effect on hematological
and growth performance parameters rather than control. Similarly, serum
antioxidants, lysozyme, protease, antiprotease and bactericidal capacity were
significantly increased (p < 0.05) in the treated groups in a dose-dependent
manner. LYZ, TNF-α, and IL-1β genes were upregulated in proportion to C:N ratios 
with the highest fold in C:N20. Furthermore, fish treated with JB-BFT presented
lower cumulative mortalities and better relative levels of production (RLP) after
experimental challenge with A. hydrophila compared to control. In conclusion,
JB-BFT has a robust influence on Nile tilapia (O. niloticus) innate immunity
through favorable innovation of various immune-cells and enzymes as well as
upregulating the expression levels of immune-related genes. This study offers
jaggery as a new carbon source with unique properties that satisfy all
considerations of biofloc technology in an eco-friendly manner.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.09.023 
PMID: 32961293 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

