
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 26;11:2032. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02032. eCollection 
2020.

Berry Polyphenols and Fibers Modulate Distinct Microbial Metabolic Functions and 
Gut Microbiota Enterotype-Like Clustering in Obese Mice.

Rodríguez-Daza MC(1)(2), Roquim M(1), Dudonné S(1)(3), Pilon G(1)(4), Levy E(1), 
Marette A(1)(4), Roy D(1)(2), Desjardins Y(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods (INAF), Faculty of Agriculture and
Food Sciences, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Agriculture and Food Sciences, Laval
University, Québec, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Plant Science, Faculty of Agriculture and Food Sciences, Laval
University, Québec, QC, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Cardiology Axis of Quebec Heart
and Lung Institute, Laval University, Québec, QC, Canada.

Berries are rich in polyphenols and plant cell wall polysaccharides (fibers),
including cellulose, hemicellulose, arabinans and arabino-xyloglucans rich
pectin. Most of polyphenols and fibers are known to be poorly absorbed in the
small intestine and reach the colon where they interact with the gut microbiota, 
conferring health benefits to the host. This study assessed the contribution of
polyphenol-rich whole cranberry and blueberry fruit powders (CP and BP), and that
of their fibrous fractions (CF and BF) on modulating the gut microbiota, the
microbial functional profile and influencing metabolic disorders induced by
high-fat high-sucrose (HFHS) diet for 8 weeks. Lean mice-associated taxa,
including Akkermansia muciniphila, Dubosiella newyorkensis, and Angelakisella,
were selectively induced by diet supplementation with polyphenol-rich CP and BP. 
Fiber-rich CF also triggered polyphenols-degrading families Coriobacteriaceae and
Eggerthellaceae. Diet supplementation with polyphenol-rich CP, but not with its
fiber-rich CF, reduced fat mass depots, body weight and energy efficiency in
HFHS-fed mice. However, CF reduced liver triglycerides in HFHS-fed mice.
Importantly, polyphenol-rich CP-diet normalized microbial functions to a level
comparable to that of Chow-fed controls. Using multivariate association modeling,
taxa and predicted functions distinguishing an obese phenotype from healthy
controls and berry-treated mice were identified. The enterotype-like clustering
analysis underlined the link between a long-term diet intake and the functional
stratification of the gut microbiota. The supplementation of a HFHS-diet with
polyphenol-rich CP drove mice gut microbiota from Firmicutes/Ruminococcus
enterotype into an enterotype linked to healthier host status, which is
Prevotella/Akkermansiaceae. This study highlights the prebiotic role of
polyphenols, and their contribution to the compositional and functional
modulation of the gut microbiota, counteracting obesity.

Copyright © 2020 Rodríguez-Daza, Roquim, Dudonné, Pilon, Levy, Marette, Roy and
Desjardins.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02032 
PMCID: PMC7479096
PMID: 32983031 

