
1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2020 Sep 11;7(9):ofaa338. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofaa338.
eCollection 2020 Sep.

Repurposing Metformin in Nondiabetic People With HIV: Influence on Weight and Gut
Microbiota.

Isnard S(1)(2)(3), Lin J(1)(2), Fombuena B(1)(2), Ouyang J(1)(2)(4), Varin TV(5),
Richard C(6), Marette A(5)(7), Ramendra R(1)(2)(8), Planas D(6)(9), Raymond
Marchand L(6), Messaoudene M(6), Van der Ley CP(10), Kema IP(10), Sohail Ahmed
D(1)(2), Zhang Y(11), Finkelman M(11), Routy B(6)(12), Angel J(13), Ancuta
P(6)(9), Routy JP(1)(2)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute,
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Chronic Viral Illness Service, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal,
Québec, Canada.
(3)CIHR Canadian HIV Trials Network, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Chongqing Public Health Medical Center, Chongqing, China.
(5)Institute of Nutrition and Functional Foods, Laval University, Québec City,
Québec, Canada.
(6)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(7)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Cardiology Axis of the Québec
Heart and Lung Institute, Laval University, Québec City, Québec, Canada.
(8)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Département de Microbiologie, Infectiologie et Immunologie, Faculté de
Médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(10)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, the Netherlands.
(11)Associates of Cape Cod Inc., Falmouth, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Division of Medicine, Department of Hemato-Oncology, University of Montreal
Healthcare Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(13)The Ottawa Hospital, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Division of Hematology, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec,
Canada.

Background: People with HIV (PWH) taking antiretroviral therapy (ART) may
experience weight gain, dyslipidemia, increased risk of non-AIDS comorbidities,
and long-term alteration of the gut microbiota. Both low CD4/CD8 ratio and
chronic inflammation have been associated with changes in the gut microbiota of
PWH. The antidiabetic drug metformin has been shown to improve gut microbiota
composition while decreasing weight and inflammation in diabetes and polycystic
ovary syndrome. Nevertheless, it remains unknown whether metformin may benefit
PWH receiving ART, especially those with a low CD4/CD8 ratio.
Methods: In the Lilac pilot trial, we recruited 23 nondiabetic PWH receiving ART 
for more than 2 years with a low CD4/CD8 ratio (<0.7). Blood and stool samples
were collected during study visits at baseline, after a 12-week metformin
treatment, and 12 weeks after discontinuation. Microbiota composition was
analyzed by 16S rDNA gene sequencing, and markers of inflammation were assessed
in plasma.
Results: Metformin decreased weight in PWH, and weight loss was inversely
correlated with plasma levels of the satiety factor GDF-15. Furthermore,
metformin changed the gut microbiota composition by increasing the abundance of
anti-inflammatory bacteria such as butyrate-producing species and the protective 
Akkermansia muciniphila.
Conclusions: Our study provides the first evidence that a 12-week metformin
treatment decreased weight and favored anti-inflammatory bacteria abundance in
the microbiota of nondiabetic ART-treated PWH. Larger randomized
placebo-controlled clinical trials with longer metformin treatment will be needed
to further investigate the role of metformin in reducing inflammation and the
risk of non-AIDS comorbidities in ART-treated PWH.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofaa338 
PMCID: PMC7489545
PMID: 32964062 

