
1. J Altern Complement Med. 2020 Sep 18. doi: 10.1089/acm.2020.0148. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Modulatory Effects of Triphala and Manjistha Dietary Supplementation on Human Gut
Microbiota: A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Pilot Study.

Peterson CT(1), Pourang A(2), Dhaliwal S(2), Kohn JN(3), Uchitel S(4), Singh
H(5), Mills PJ(1), Peterson SN(6), Sivamani RK(2)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, Center of Excellence for
Research and Training in Integrative Health, University of California San Diego, 
School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA,
USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA.
(4)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Department of Naturopathic Medicine, Bastyr University San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.
(6)Tumor Microenvironment and Cancer Immunology Program, Sanford Burnham Prebys
Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences, California State University, Sacramento,
CA, USA.
(8)College of Medicine, California Northstate University, Elk Grove, CA, USA.
(9)Pacific Skin Institute, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(10)Zen Dermatology, Sacramento, CA, USA.

Objectives: Triphala (which contains Emblica officinalis, Terminalia bellerica,
and Terminalia chebula) and manjistha (Rubia cordifolia), have received increased
clinical attention. The aim of the study was to evaluate the effects of triphala,
manjistha, or placebo dietary supplementation on gut microbiota as such studies
in humans are lacking. Design: This was a 4-week randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled pilot trial. Setting: This trial was conducted at the
University of California Davis, Department of Dermatology. Subjects: A total of
31 healthy human subjects were randomized to 3 groups. Interventions: The 3
groups were instructed to take 2,000 mg of either triphala, manjistha or placebo 
daily for 4 weeks. Outcome Measures: The impact of treatment on gut microbiota
composition was evaluated following a 4-week dietary intervention by profiling
fecal communities with 16S rRNA profiling in triphala (n = 9), manjistha (n = 9),
or placebo (n = 11) treated subjects that completed the intervention. Results: An
average of 336 phylotypes were detected in each sample (range: 161 to 648). The
analysis of gut microbiota in placebo control and herb-supplemented participants 
indicated that responses were highly personalized, and no taxa were uniformly
altered by the medicinal herb supplementation protocol. Subjects in both
treatment groups displayed a trend toward decreased Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes
ratio and increased relative abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila. Both medicinal
herb treatments reduced the relative abundance of Rikenellaceae, primarily
reflecting changes in Alistipes spp. Conclusions: Dietary supplementation with
medicinal herbs altered fecal microbial communities. Despite the lack of a clear 
response signature, a group of bacterial taxa were identified that were more
commonly altered in herb-supplemented participants compared to placebo controls. 
Clinicaltrials.gov identifier NCT03477825.

DOI: 10.1089/acm.2020.0148 
PMID: 32955913 

