
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Sep 21. doi: 10.1111/jam.14853. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparative analysis of beneficial effects of vancomycin treatment on Th1- and
Th2-biased mice and the role of gut microbiota.

Ray P(1), Pandey U(1), Aich P(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and
Research (NISER), HBNI, Khurdha, Odisha, India.

AIMS: The aim was to understand the time-dependent antibiotic-induced
perturbation pattern of gut microbiota and its effect on the innate immune and
metabolic profile of the host.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Vancomycin was administered at 50 mg kg-1 of body weight
twice daily for six consecutive days to perturb the gut microbiota of C57BL/6
(Th1-biased) and BALB/c (Th2-biased) mice. Following treatment with vancomycin,
we observed a reduction in the abundance of phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroides and 
an increase in Proteobacteria in the gut for both strains of mice following
treatment with vancomycin till day 4. Abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila of
Verrucomicrobia phylum also increased, from day 5 onwards following vancomycin
treatment. The time-dependent variation of gut microbiota was associated with
increased (i) expression of toll-like receptors and inflammatory genes such as
TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-17, (ii) gut barrier permeability and (iii) blood glucose
level of the host. The results also showed that (i) transplantation of cecal
microbiota from vancomycin-treated day 6 mice to day 3 vancomycin-treated mice
helped in restoring blood glucose level in C57BL/6 mice and (ii) short-chain
fatty acids like acetate, butyrate and propionate changed with the alteration of 
gut microbiota to induce differential regulation of host immune response.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results revealed that an increase in A. muciniphila led 
to decreased inflammation and increased rate of glucose tolerance in the host.
The treatment, with vancomycin till day 4, increased expression of inflammatory
genes. The continuation of vancomycin for two more days reversed the effects. The
effects were significantly more in C57BL/6 than BALB/c mice.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The current study established that the
treatment with vancomycin till day 4 increased pathogenic bacteria but day 5
onwards provided significant health-related benefits to the host by increasing A.
muciniphila more in C57BL/6 than BALB/c mice.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14853 
PMID: 32955795 

