
1. Gut. 2020 Sep 11. pii: gutjnl-2020-322260. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322260. [Epub
ahead of print]

Mucus barrier, mucins and gut microbiota: the expected slimy partners?

Paone P(1), Cani PD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute,
Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and BIOtechnology (WELBIO), UCLouvain,
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(2)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute,
Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and BIOtechnology (WELBIO), UCLouvain,
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium patrice.cani@uclouvain.be.

The gastrointestinal tract is often considered as a key organ involved in the
digestion of food and providing nutrients to the body for proper maintenance.
However, this system is composed of organs that are extremely complex. Among the 
different parts, the intestine is viewed as an incredible surface of contact with
the environment and is colonised by hundreds of trillions of gut microbes. The
role of the gut barrier has been studied for decades, but the exact mechanisms
involved in the protection of the gut barrier are various and complementary.
Among them, the integrity of the mucus barrier is one of the first lines of
protection of the gastrointestinal tract. In the past, this 'slimy' partner was
mostly considered a simple lubricant for facilitating the progression of the food
bolus and the stools in the gut. Since then, different researchers have made
important progress, and currently, the regulation of this mucus barrier is
gaining increasing attention from the scientific community. Among the factors
influencing the mucus barrier, the microbiome plays a major role in driving mucus
changes. Additionally, our dietary habits (ie, high-fat diet,
low-fibre/high-fibre diet, food additives, pre- probiotics) influence the mucus
at different levels. Given that the mucus layer has been linked with the
appearance of diseases, proper knowledge is highly warranted. Here, we debate
different aspects of the mucus layer by focusing on its chemical composition,
regulation of synthesis and degradation by the microbiota as well as some
characteristics of the mucus layer in both physiological and pathological
situations.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322260 
PMID: 32917747 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: PDC is an inventor of patent
applications dealing with the use of Akkermansia muciniphila and its components
in the context of obesity and related disorders. PDC is cofounder of A-Mansia
Biotech SA.

