
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Aug 27;85:104513. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104513.
[Epub ahead of print]

First whole genome sequence of Paenalcaligenes suwonensis bearing blaVIM-5
Metallo-β-lactamase: A clinical isolate responsible for acute gastroenteritis.

Olowo-Okere A(1), Ibrahim YKE(2), Olayinka BO(2), Ehinmidu JO(2), Mohammed Y(3), 
Nabti LZ(4), Rolain JM(5), Diene SM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Usmanu Danfodiyo 
University Sokoto, Nigeria; Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical
Microbiology, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria; MEPHI, IRD, APHM,
IHU-Mediterranee Infection, Faculté de Pharmacie, Aix-Marseille University,
Marseille, France.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Microbiology, Ahmadu Bello
University, Zaria, Nigeria.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Health Sciences, Usmanu
Danfodiyo University, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(4)Université de Sétif 1, Laboratoire de Microbiologie (CHU de Sétif), Sétif,
Algeria; MEPHI, IRD, APHM, IHU-Mediterranee Infection, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(5)MEPHI, IRD, APHM, IHU-Mediterranee Infection, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(6)MEPHI, IRD, APHM, IHU-Mediterranee Infection, Faculté de Pharmacie,
Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France. Electronic address:
seydina.diene@univ-amu.fr.

Carbapenemase-producing Alcaligenes species has been described in only few
studies, with none so far from the African continent. Here, we report the whole
genome sequence of Peanalcaligenes suwonensis bearing blaVIM-5
metallo-β-lactamase and first detection of carbapenemase producing Alcaligenes
faecalis isolated from patients attending tertiary healthcare facilities in
Nigeria. The isolates were identified by MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry. Antibiotic 
susceptibility assay, modified Carba NP test and genomic investigation revealed
that two isolates of Alcaligenes faecalis and an isolate of Paenalcaligenes
suwonensis harboured blaVIM-5 gene. The genome sequence analysis of the P.
suwonensis 191B isolate, responsible for acute gastroenteritis, reveal the
presence of 18 antibiotic resistance genes coding for resistance to five
different classes of antibiotics. Three of the genes (blaOXA-368, blaCARB-4 and
blaVIM-5) codes for resistance to β-lactam antibiotics. To our best knowledge, we
describe here the first genome sequence of P. suwonensis species and the first
detection of class B carbapenemase blaVIM-5 in a clinical isolate of P.
suwonensis species and Alcaligenes faecalis in Nigeria. The finding of this study
is of concern, as lateral dissemination of the genes into clinically important
Gram-negative pathogens is highly likely.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104513 
PMID: 32860988 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The manuscript 
has been read by all authors and has been approved for its submission. We have no
conflicts of interest to disclose.

