
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jun 9;11:906. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00906. eCollection
2020.

The Genus Alistipes: Gut Bacteria With Emerging Implications to Inflammation,
Cancer, and Mental Health.

Parker BJ(1), Wearsch PA(1), Veloo ACM(2), Rodriguez-Palacios A(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine,
Cleveland, OH, United States.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, United States.
(4)Germ-Free and Gut Microbiome, Digestive Health Research Institute, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, United States.

Alistipes is a relatively new genus of bacteria isolated primarily from medical
clinical samples, although at a low rate compared to other genus members of the
Bacteroidetes phylum, which are highly relevant in dysbiosis and disease.
According to the taxonomy database at The National Center for Biotechnology
Information, the genus consists of 13 species: Alistipes finegoldii, Alistipes
putredinis, Alistipes onderdonkii, Alistipes shahii, Alistipes indistinctus,
Alistipes senegalensis, Alistipes timonensis, Alistipes obesi, Alistipes ihumii, 
Alistipes inops, Alistipes megaguti, Alistipes provencensis, and Alistipes
massiliensis. Alistipes communis and A. dispar, and the subspecies A. Onderdonkii
subspecies vulgaris (vs. onderdonkii subsp.) are the newest strains featured
outside that list. Although typically isolated from the human gut microbiome
various species of this genus have been isolated from patients suffering from
appendicitis, and abdominal and rectal abscess. It is possible that as Alistipes 
spp. emerge, their identification in clinical samples may be underrepresented as 
novel MS-TOF methods may not be fully capable to discriminate distinct species as
separate since it will require the upgrading of MS-TOF identification databases. 
In terms of pathogenicity, there is contrasting evidence indicating that
Alistipes may have protective effects against some diseases, including liver
fibrosis, colitis, cancer immunotherapy, and cardiovascular disease. In contrast,
other studies indicate Alistipes is pathogenic in colorectal cancer and is
associated with mental signs of depression. Gut dysbiosis seems to play a role in
determining the compositional abundance of Alistipes in the feces (e.g., in
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, hepatic encephalopathy, and liver fibrosis). Since
Alistipes is a relatively recent sub-branch genus of the Bacteroidetes phylum,
and since Bacteroidetes are commonly associated with chronic intestinal
inflammation, this narrative review illustrates emerging immunological and
mechanistic implications by which Alistipes spp. correlate with human health.

Copyright © 2020 Parker, Wearsch, Veloo and Rodriguez-Palacios.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00906 
PMCID: PMC7296073
PMID: 32582143 

