
1. J Periodontol. 2020 Jul 31. doi: 10.1002/JPER.20-0295. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel and known periodontal pathogens residing in gingival crevicular fluid are
associated with rheumatoid arthritis.

Manoil D(1), Bostanci N(1)(2), Mumcu G(3), Inanc N(4), Can M(5), Direskeneli
H(4), Belibasakis GN(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Medicine, Division of Oral Diseases, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Center of Dental Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Faculty of Health Sciences, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Faculty of
Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, School of Medicine,
Medipol University, Istanbul, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Periodontitis is a suspected environmental risk factor for the
development of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, correlation mechanisms between
the two pathologies remain elusive. This study examined potential correlations
between detached subgingival bacteria collected in gingival crevicular fluid
(GCF) and RA parameters.
METHODS: RA patients (n = 52, F:M = 40:12), patients with Behcet's disease (BD,
n = 40, F:M = 29:11) as another systemic inflammatory disease were studied along 
with a systemically healthy control group (HC, n = 57, F:M = 40:17). All
participants were non-smokers. Full mouth periodontal parameters were recorded.
RA activity was assessed using the 28-joint Disease Activity Score (DAS-28).
Rheumatoid factors (RFs)-IgM and -IgA were measured by ELISA. GCF samples were
investigated by means of fluorescent in situ hybridization for 10 different
bacterial taxa.
RESULTS: The taxa TM7, Synergistetes cluster B, Leptotrichia, Megasphaera,
Anaeroglobus geminatus, and Tannerella forsythia displayed significantly
differential abundances between the groups. Whereas abundances of Megasphaera and
A. geminatus were significantly increased in the RA group, only Porphyromonas
gingivalis displayed significant correlations with plaque scores, bleeding on
probing, and RF-IgA. RA patients displaying RF-IgA levels >75 IU/mL exhibited
five-fold more abundant P. gingivalis levels than patients below the threshold.
This association with RF-IgA levels appeared even more pronounced, by six-fold
more P. gingivalis (P = 0.025), in patients with a DAS-28 score >3.2, indicative 
of moderate/very active RA.
CONCLUSIONS: Unattached GCF bacteria may mediate the association between
periodontitis and RA, and monitoring the bacterial composition of GCF might
inform on RA activity. The role of newly identified bacterial taxa in RA warrants
further investigations.

© 2020 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.20-0295 
PMID: 32737880 

