
1. J Hosp Infect. 2020 Aug;105(4):691-697. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2020.05.012. Epub
2020 May 14.

Outbreak of Arcanobacterium haemolyticum in chronic wounds in The Netherlands.

Bruins MJ(1), de Vries-van Rossum SV(2), Huiskes-Roerink R(2), Wallinga JA(3),
Waindrich M(4), Creemers K(5), Oskam J(4), Ruijs GJHM(3), Debast SB(3),
Wagenvoort GHJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Isala, Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Zwolle,
The Netherlands. Electronic address: m.j.bruins@isala.nl.
(2)Isala, Department of Infection Prevention, Zwolle, The Netherlands.
(3)Isala, Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Zwolle,
The Netherlands.
(4)Isala, Department of Surgery, Zwolle, The Netherlands.
(5)QualityZorg, Nieuw-Vennep, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Aging and comorbidities such as diabetes and vascular problems
contribute to the increasing occurrence of chronic wounds. From the beginning of 
2016, a marked increase in Arcanobacterium haemolyticum (ARH) in chronic wound
cultures was noted among patients visiting a wound expertise centre in The
Netherlands.
AIM: To report the outbreak investigation of ARH cultured from chronic wounds and
describe the implemented infection prevention measures.
METHODS: In total, 50 ARH isolates were sent to a reference laboratory for
molecular typing. Samples for bacterial culture and ARH polymerase chain reaction
were taken from care workers, the environment and items used for wound care.
Infection prevention measures were implemented in a bundled approach, involving
education, better aseptic wound care conditions and hygienic precautions. Before 
and after the implementation of infection prevention measures, two screening
rounds of ARH testing were performed among all patients receiving home care.
RESULTS: ARH isolates from wound care patients were found to be identical by core
genome multi-locus sequence typing. No definite outbreak source could be
determined by culture. However, three pairs of forceps, used by two nurses on
multiple patients, were found to be ARH positive by polymerase chain reaction. In
the two screening rounds before and after the implementation of infection
prevention measures, the proportion of ARH-positive patients decreased
significantly from 20% (20/99) to 3% (3/104). Subsequently, no new cases
occurred.
CONCLUSION: This first ARH outbreak was likely caused by re-using contaminated
instruments. Through the implementation of improved infection prevention measures
and re-education of all employees involved, the outbreak was controlled. With the
current trend of care transition, infection control must be a major concern.

Copyright © 2020 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2020.05.012 
PMID: 32417434 

