
1. Physiol Plant. 2020 Jul 20. doi: 10.1111/ppl.13171. [Epub ahead of print]

Bacterial bioaugmentation enhances hydrocarbon degradation, plant colonization
and gene expression in diesel-contaminated soil.

Ummara U(1), Noreen S(1), Afzal M(2), Ahmad P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pure and Applied Biology, Bahauddin Zakariya University, Multan, 
Pakistan.
(2)National Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE),
Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(3)Botany and Microbiology Department, College of Science, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Environmental contamination by hydrocarbons is a major problem, and hydrocarbon
accumulation in soil poses hazardous threat to ecosystems. Phytoremediation,
which involves plants, is an encouraging technique for the removal of
hydrocarbons from polluted soil and water. The purpose of this investigation was 
to examine whether bacterial inoculation enhanced the phytoremediation of
hydrocarbons in diesel-contaminated soil vegetated with maize (Zea mays L.). The 
two cultivars of maize, MMRI Yellow and Pearl White, were planted in
diesel-polluted soil (0, 1.5, 2.5, and 3.5 g diesel kg-1 soil), and inoculated
with the consortium of three alkane-degrading bacterial strains, Arthrobacter
oxydans ITRH49, Pseudomonas sp. ITRI73 and Pseudomonas sp. MixRI75. Bacterial
inoculation enhanced plant growth and hydrocarbon degradation. Between two
cultivars, MMRI Yellow showed better growth and hydrocarbon degradation in the
presence and absence of bacterial inoculation. Maximum hydrocarbon degradation
(80%) was observed in the soil having minimum concentration of diesel (1.5 g kg-1
soil), and vegetated with bacterial inoculated MMRI Yellow maize cultivar.
Furthermore, more bacterial colonization, and abundance and expression of the
alkane hydroxylase gene (alkB) were observed in the root interior than in the
rhizosphere and shoot interior of the plants. The bacteria-mediated
phytoremediation of soil contaminated with hydrocarbons suggested that the
collective use of plants and bacteria was the most beneficial approach for the
reclamation of diesel-contaminated soil in comparison with vegetation alone.

© 2020 Scandinavian Plant Physiology Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ppl.13171 
PMID: 32691441 

