
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Mar 4;10:83. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00083.
eCollection 2020.

Gardnerella vaginalis Enhances Atopobium vaginae Viability in an in vitro Model.

Castro J(1), Rosca AS(1), Cools P(2), Vaneechoutte M(2), Cerca N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Research in Biofilms Rosário Oliveira (LIBRO), Centre of
Biological Engineering (CEB), Braga, Portugal.
(2)Laboratory Bacteriology Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is the most common vaginal infection among women of
reproductive age. A hallmark of BV is the presence of a highly structured
polymicrobial biofilm on the vaginal epithelium, presumably initiated by
facultative anaerobes of the genus Gardnerella, which then becomes a scaffold for
other species to adhere to. One of the species often found incorporated in
Gardnerella mediated biofilms is Atopobium vaginae. Interestingly, A. vaginae is 
very rarely found without the presence of Gardnerella. However, not much is known
regarding the interactions between A. vaginae and Gardnerella species. This study
assessed biological interactions between Gardnerella vaginalis and A. vaginae. In
our in vitro model, by using specific Gardnerella and A. vaginae Peptide Nucleic 
Acid (PNA)-Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH) probes, we confirmed that A.
vaginae was able to incorporate a pre-formed G. vaginalis biofilm, accounting for
up to 20% of the total number of biofilm cells. However, our findings showed that
almost 92% of A. vaginae cells lost viability after 48 h of mono-species
planktonic growth, but were able to maintain viability when co-cultured with
Gardnerella or after pre-conditioning with cell-free supernatant of Gardnerella
cultures. While the in vitro conditions are very different from the in vivo
microenvironment, this study contributes to a better understanding of why A.
vaginae vaginal colonization rarely occurs in the absence of Gardnerella.
Overall, this highlights the importance of microbial interactions between
BV-associated bacteria and demands more studies focused on the polymicrobial
bacterial communities found in BV.

Copyright © 2020 Castro, Rosca, Cools, Vaneechoutte and Cerca.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00083 
PMCID: PMC7064616
PMID: 32195197 

