
1. Molecules. 2020 Jun 30;25(13). pii: E2985. doi: 10.3390/molecules25132985.

Effect of Sporulation Conditions Following Submerged Cultivation on the
Resistance of Bacillus atrophaeus Spores against Inactivation by H2O2.

Stier P(1), Kulozik U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Food and Bioprocess Engineering, Technical University of Munich,
85354 Freising, Germany.

The resistance formation of spores in general and of Bacillus atrophaeus in
particular has long been the focus of science in the bio-defense, pharmaceutical 
and food industries. In the food industry, it is used as a biological indicator
(BI) for the evaluation of the inactivation effects of hydrogen peroxide in
processing and end packaging lines' sterilization. Defined BI resistances are
critical to avoid false positive and negative tests, which are salient problems
due to the variable resistance of currently available commercial BIs. Although
spores for use as BIs have been produced for years, little is known about the
influence of sporulation conditions on the resistance as a potential source of
random variability. This study therefore examines the dependence of spore
resistance on the temperature, pH and partial oxygen saturation during submerged 
production in a bioreactor. For this purpose, spores were produced under
different sporulation conditions and their resistance, defined by the D-value,
was determined using a count reduction test in tempered 35% liquid hydrogen
peroxide. The statistical analysis of the test results shows a quadratic
dependence of the resistance on the pH, with the highest D‑values at neutral pH. 
The sporulation temperature has a linear influence on the resistance. The higher 
the temperature, the higher the D‑value. However, these factors interact with
each other, which means that the temperature only influences the resistance when 
the pH is within a certain range. The oxygen partial pressure during sporulation 
has no significant influence. Based on the data obtained, a model could be
developed enabling the resistance of BIs to be calculated, predicted and
standardized depending on the sporulation conditions. BI manufacturers could thus
produce BIs with defined resistances for the validation of sterilization effects 
in aseptic packaging/filling lines for the reliable manufacture of shelf-stable
and safe food products.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25132985 
PMCID: PMC7412142
PMID: 32629775 

