
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Sep 25. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09709-9.
[Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of miRNA Expression in the Ileum of Broiler Chickens During Bacillus
licheniformis H2 Supplementation Against Subclinical Necrotic Enteritis.

Zhao Y(1), Zeng D(1), Wang H(2), Sun N(1), Xin J(1), Yang H(3), Lei L(3),
Khalique A(1), Rajput DS(1), Pan K(1), Shu G(1), Jing B(1), Ni X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Microecology Institute, College of Veterinary, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of
Gastroenterology, Institute of Gastroenterology of Guangdong Province, Nanfang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Chengdu Slan Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Chengdu, China.
(4)Animal Microecology Institute, College of Veterinary, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. xueqinni@foxmail.com.

Subclinical necrotic enteritis (SNE) is one of the serious threats to the poultry
industry. Probiotics have been proven to exert beneficial effects in controlling 
SNE. However, their exact mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. Moreover,
few studies have focused on their impact on microRNAs (miRNAs). Therefore, the
present study aimed to explore the miRNA expression profiles in the ileum of
broiler chickens during probiotic supplementation for controlling SNE. A total of
180 newly hatched male broilers were randomly allocated into three groups,
including a negative control group, an SNE infection group, and a Bacillus
licheniformis H2 pretreatment group. Illumina high-throughput sequencing was
conducted to identify the miRNA expression of the three groups. Results showed
that 628 miRNAs, including 582 known miRNAs and 46 novel miRNAs, were detected in
the miRNA libraries. The target genes of 57 significantly differentially
expressed miRNAs were predicted and annotated. Moreover, they were found to be
partly enriched in pathways related to immunity and inflammation such as tumor
necrosis factor receptor binding, immune response-regulating signaling pathway,
Toll-like receptor 2 signaling pathway, interleukin-15 production, activation of 
NF-κB-inducing kinase activity, and MAP kinase tyrosine/serine/threonine
phosphatase activity. Some of the target genes of 57 miRNAs were related to the
MAPK signaling pathway. Furthermore, the expression of several miRNAs, which may 
be involved in the MAPK signaling pathway, was significantly affected by SNE
induction and showed no significant difference in the presence of H2. All these
findings provide comprehensive miRNA expression profiles of three different
treatment groups. They further suggest that H2 could exert beneficial effects in 
controlling SNE through immune and inflammatory response associated with altered 
miRNA expression, such as the MAPK signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09709-9 
PMID: 32975724 

