
1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2020 May 3;152:90-99. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.04.039.
[Epub ahead of print]

Deciphering metal toxicity responses of flax (Linum usitatissimum L.) with
exopolysaccharide and ACC-deaminase producing bacteria in industrially
contaminated soils.

Zainab N(1), Amna(1), Din BU(1), Javed MT(2), Afridi MS(3), Mukhtar T(1), Kamran 
MA(4), Qurat Ul Ain(1), Khan AA(5), Ali J(1), Jatoi WN(6), Hussain Munis MF(1),
Chaudhary HJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Botany, Government College University, 38000, Faisalabad,
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology, Federal University of Lavras, (UFLA),
37200-900, Larvas, MG, Brazil.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Soil and Sustainable Agriculture, Institute of Soil
Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing, PR China.
(5)Department of Plant Biology and Ecology, Nankai University, Tianjin, PR China.
(6)Department of Agronomy, Faculty of Agriculture & Environmental Sciences, The
Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Punjab, Pakistan.
(7)Department of Plant Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, 45320,
Pakistan. Electronic address: hassaan@qau.edu.pk.

Rapid industrialization is the main reason of heavy metals contamination of soil 
colloids and water reservoirs. Heavy metals are persistent inorganic pollutants; 
deleterious to plants, animals and human beings because of accumulation in food
chain. The aim of the current work was to evaluate the role of indole acetic acid
(IAA), exopolysaccharide (EPS) and ACC-deaminase producing plant growth promoting
rhizobacteria (PGPR) i.e .B. gibsonii PM11 and B. xiamenensis PM14 in metal
phytoremediation of metals, their survival and plant growth promotion potential
in metal polluted environment as well as alterations in physio-biochemical
responses of inoculated L. usitatissimum plants towards heavy metal toxicity. Two
bacterial strains Bacillus gibsonii (PM11) and Bacillus xiamenensis (PM14),
previously isolated from sugarcane's rhizosphere, were screened for metal
tolerance (50 mg/l to 1000 mg/l) and plant growth promoting traits like IAA,
ACC-deaminase, EPS production and nitrogen fixing ability under metal stress. The
response of flax plant (Linum usitatissimum L.) was analyzed in a pot experiment 
containing both industrially contaminated and non-contaminated soils. Experiment 
was comprised of six different treatments, each with three replicates. At the end
of the experiment, role of metal tolerant plant growth promoting bacterial
inoculation was elucidated by analyzing the plant growth parameters, chlorophyll 
contents, antioxidative enzymes, and metal uptake both under standard and metal
contaminated rhizospheres. Results revealed that root and shoot length, plant's
fresh and dry weight, proline content, chlorophyll content, antioxidant enzymatic
activity was increased in plants inoculated with plant growth promoting bacteria 
as compared to non-inoculated ones both in non-contaminated and industrial
contaminated soils. In current study, inoculation of IAA, EPS and ACC-deaminase
producing bacteria enhances plant growth and nutrient availability by minimizing 
metal-induced stressed conditions. Moreover, elevated phytoextraction of
multi-metals from industrial contaminated soils by PGPR inoculated L.
usitatissimum plants reveal that these strains could be used as sweepers in heavy
metals polluted environment.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.04.039 
PMID: 32408178 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
declare that they have no conflict of interest.

