
1. J Mol Model. 2020 May 9;26(6):124. doi: 10.1007/s00894-020-04383-8.

Effects of oligolignol sizes and binding modes on a GH11 xylanase inhibition
revealed by molecular modeling techniques.

Muhammad A(1)(2)(3), Khunrae P(4), Sutthibutpong T(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Theoretical and Computational Physics Group, Department of Physics, King
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT), Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Theoretical and Computational Science Center (TaCS), Science Laboratory
Building, Faculty of Science, King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
(KMUTT), 126 Pracha Uthit Road, Bang Mod, Thrung Khru, Bangkok, 10140, Thailand.
(3)Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Kano University of Science and
Technology (KUST), Wudil, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Science Laboratory Building, Faculty of Science,
King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Theoretical and Computational Physics Group, Department of Physics, King
Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi (KMUTT), Bangkok, Thailand.
thana.sut@mail.kmutt.ac.th.
(6)Theoretical and Computational Science Center (TaCS), Science Laboratory
Building, Faculty of Science, King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi
(KMUTT), 126 Pracha Uthit Road, Bang Mod, Thrung Khru, Bangkok, 10140, Thailand. 
thana.sut@mail.kmutt.ac.th.

Lignin and phenolic compounds have been shown as the main recalcitrance for
biomass decomposition, as they inhibit a number of lignocellulose-degrading
enzymes. Understanding the inhibition mechanisms and energetic competitions with 
the native substrate is essential for the development of lignin resistive
enzymes. In this study, atomistic detail of the size-dependent effects and
binding modes of monomeric coniferyl alcohol, dimeric oligolignol, and tetrameric
oligolignol made from coniferyl alcohols on the GH11 xylanase from Bacillus
firmus strain K-1 was investigated by using molecular docking and atomistic
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. From the MD simulation results on the docked
conformation of oligolignol binding within the "Cleft" and the "N-terminal,"
changes were observed both for protein conformations and positional binding of
ligands, as binding with "Thumb" regions was found for all oligolignin models.
Moreover, the uniquely stable "N-terminal" binding of the coniferyl alcohol
monomer had no effect on the highly fluctuated Thumb region, showing no sign of
inhibitory effect, and was in good agreement with recent studies. However, the
inhibitory effect of oligolignols was size dependent, as the estimated binding
energy of the tetrameric oligolignol became stronger than that of the xylohexaose
substrate, and the important binding residues were identified for future protein 
engineering attempts to enhance the lignin resistivity of GH11. Graphical
Abstract Size-dependent binding modes of coniferyl alcohol monomers (upper
panels) and the dimers (lower panels). Uniquely stable "N-terminal" binding of
the monomer is shown to have no effect on the binding pocket, and hence no sign
of inhibition, which was in good agreement with some recent studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00894-020-04383-8 
PMID: 32388588 

