
1. Microbiome. 2020 Sep 22;8(1):137. doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00892-z.

Bio-organic fertilizers stimulate indigenous soil Pseudomonas populations to
enhance plant disease suppression.

Tao C(1)(2), Li R(1)(2), Xiong W(3), Shen Z(1)(2), Liu S(1)(2), Wang B(4), Ruan
Y(4), Geisen S(5)(6), Shen Q(7)(8)(9), Kowalchuk GA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Provincial Key Lab of Solid Organic Waste Utilization, Jiangsu
Collaborative Innovation Center of Solid Organic Wastes, Educational Ministry
Engineering Center of Resource-saving fertilizers, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, 210095, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(2)The Key Laboratory of Plant Immunity, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, 210095, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(3)Ecology and Biodiversity Group, Department of Biology, Institute of
Environmental Biology, Utrecht University, 3584, Utrecht, CH, Netherlands.
(4)Hainan key Laboratory for Sustainable Utilization of Tropical Bio-resources,
College of tropical crops, Hainan University, Haikou, 570228, People's Republic
of China.
(5)Department of Terrestrial Ecology, Netherlands Institute for Ecology,
(NIOO-KNAW), 6708, Wageningen, PB, Netherlands.
(6)Laboratory of Nematology, Wageningen University, 6700, Wageningen, AA,
Netherlands.
(7)Jiangsu Provincial Key Lab of Solid Organic Waste Utilization, Jiangsu
Collaborative Innovation Center of Solid Organic Wastes, Educational Ministry
Engineering Center of Resource-saving fertilizers, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, 210095, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
shenqirong@njau.edu.cn.
(8)The Key Laboratory of Plant Immunity, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, 210095, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China. shenqirong@njau.edu.cn.
(9)College of Resources and Environmental Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, 210095, People's Republic of China. shenqirong@njau.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Plant diseases caused by fungal pathogen result in a substantial
economic impact on the global food and fruit industry. Application of organic
fertilizers supplemented with biocontrol microorganisms (i.e. bioorganic
fertilizers) has been shown to improve resistance against plant pathogens at
least in part due to impacts on the structure and function of the resident soil
microbiome. However, it remains unclear whether such improvements are driven by
the specific action of microbial inoculants, microbial populations naturally
resident to the organic fertilizer or the physical-chemical properties of the
compost substrate. The aim of this study was to seek the ecological mechanisms
involved in the disease suppressive activity of bio-organic fertilizers.
RESULTS: To disentangle the mechanism of bio-organic fertilizer action, we
conducted an experiment tracking Fusarium wilt disease of banana and changes in
soil microbial communities over three growth seasons in response to the following
four treatments: bio-organic fertilizer (containing Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
W19), organic fertilizer, sterilized organic fertilizer and sterilized organic
fertilizer supplemented with B. amyloliquefaciens W19. We found that sterilized
bioorganic fertilizer to which Bacillus was re-inoculated provided a similar
degree of disease suppression as the non-sterilized bioorganic fertilizer across 
cropping seasons. We further observed that disease suppression in these
treatments is linked to impacts on the resident soil microbial communities,
specifically by leading to increases in specific Pseudomonas spp.. Observed
correlations between Bacillus amendment and indigenous Pseudomonas spp. that
might underlie pathogen suppression were further studied in laboratory and pot
experiments. These studies revealed that specific bacterial taxa synergistically 
increase biofilm formation and likely acted as a plant-beneficial consortium
against the pathogen.
CONCLUSION: Together we demonstrate that the action of bioorganic fertilizer is a
product of the biocontrol inoculum within the organic amendment and its impact on
the resident soil microbiome. This knowledge should help in the design of more
efficient biofertilizers designed to promote soil function. Video Abstract.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-020-00892-z 
PMCID: PMC7510105
PMID: 32962766 

