
1. J Basic Microbiol. 2020 Jul 15. doi: 10.1002/jobm.202000011. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mitigation of drought stress in rice crop with plant growth-promoting abiotic
stress-tolerant rice phyllosphere bacteria.

Arun K D(1), Sabarinathan KG(2), Gomathy M(3), Kannan R(2), Balachandar D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University,
Coimbatore, India.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Agricultural College and Research Institute,
Tuticorin, India.
(3)Department of Soil Science and Agricultural Chemistry, Agricultural College
and Research Institute, Tuticorin, India.

In the search of effective drought-alleviating and growth-promoting phyllosphere 
bacteria, a total of 44 bacterial isolates were isolated from the leaf surface of
drought-tolerant rice varieties, Mattaikar, Nootripattu, Anna R(4), and PMK3, and
screened for their abiotic stress tolerance by subjecting their growth medium to 
temperature, salinity, and osmotic stress. Only eight isolates were found to grow
and proliferate under different abiotic stress conditions. These isolates were
identified using 16S ribosomal DNA gene sequence and submitted to the NCBI
database. All the bacterial isolates were identified as Bacillus sp., except
PB24, which was identified as Staphylococcus sp., and these isolates were further
screened for plant growth-promoting (PGP) traits such as IAA production, GA
production, ACC deaminase activity, and exopolysaccharide production under three 
different osmotic stress conditions adjusted using polyethylene glycol (PEG
6000). Additionally, mineral solubilization was measured under the normal
condition. Bacillus endophyticus PB3, Bacillus altitudinis PB46, and Bacillus
megaterium PB50 were found to have multifarious PGP traits. Consecutively, the
performance of an individual strain to improve the plant growth was investigated 
under the osmotic stress (25% PEG 6000) and nonstress condition by inoculating
them into rice seeds using hydroponics culture. Furthermore, the
drought-alleviating potency of bacterial strains was assessed in the rice plants 
using pot experiment (-1.2 MPa) through bacterial foliar application during the
reproductive stage. Finally, as a result of seed inoculation and foliar spray,
the application of B. megaterium PB50 significantly improved the plant growth
under osmotic stress, protected plants from physical drought through stomatal
closure, and improved carotenoid, total soluble sugars, and total protein
content. Metabolites of PB50 were profiled under both stress and nonstress
conditions using gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy.

© 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jobm.202000011 
PMID: 32667057 

