
1. EFSA J. 2020 Feb 3;18(2):e05965. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5965. eCollection 2020 
Feb.

Update of the list of QPS-recommended biological agents intentionally added to
food or feed as notified to EFSA 11: suitability of taxonomic units notified to
EFSA until September 2019.

EFSA Panel on Biological Hazards (BIOHAZ), Koutsoumanis K, Allende A,
Alvarez-Ordóñez A, Bolton D, Bover-Cid S, Chemaly M, Davies R, De Cesare A,
Hilbert F, Lindqvist R, Nauta M, Peixe L, Ru G, Simmons M, Skandamis P,
Suffredini E, Cocconcelli PS, Fernández Escámez PS, Maradona MP, Querol A, Suarez
JE, Sundh I, Vlak J, Barizzone F, Correia S, Herman L.

Qualified presumption of safety (QPS) was developed to provide a generic safety
evaluation for biological agents to support EFSA's Scientific Panels. The
taxonomic identity, body of knowledge, safety concerns and antimicrobial
resistance are assessed. Safety concerns identified for a taxonomic unit (TU) are
where possible to be confirmed at strain or product level, reflected by
'qualifications'. No new information was found that would change the previously
recommended QPS TUs and their qualifications. The list of microorganisms notified
to EFSA was updated with 54 biological agents, received between April and
September 2019; 23 already had QPS status, 14 were excluded from the QPS exercise
(7 filamentous fungi, 6 Escherichia coli, Sphingomonas paucimobilis which was
already evaluated). Seventeen, corresponding to 16 TUs, were evaluated for
possible QPS status, fourteen of these for the first time, and Protaminobacter
rubrum, evaluated previously, was excluded because it is not a valid species.
Eight TUs are recommended for QPS status. Lactobacillus parafarraginis and
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii are recommended to be included in the QPS list.
Parageobacillus thermoglucosidasius and Paenibacillus illinoisensis can be
recommended for the QPS list with the qualification 'for production purposes
only' and absence of toxigenic potential. Bacillus velezensis can be recommended 
for the QPS list with the qualification 'absence of toxigenic potential and the
absence of aminoglycoside production ability'. Cupriavidus necator,
Aurantiochytrium limacinum and Tetraselmis chuii can be recommended for the QPS
list with the qualification 'production purposes only'. Pantoea ananatis is not
recommended for the QPS list due to lack of body of knowledge in relation to its 
pathogenicity potential for plants. Corynebacterium stationis, Hamamotoa
singularis, Rhodococcus aetherivorans and Rhodococcus ruber cannot be recommended
for the QPS list due to lack of body of knowledge. Kodamaea ohmeri cannot be
recommended for the QPS list due to safety concerns.

© 2020 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.5965 
PMCID: PMC7448003
PMID: 32874211 

