
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jul 21. doi: 10.1111/jam.14791. [Epub ahead of print]

Inactivation of Bacillus anthracis and Bacillus atrophaeus spores on different
surfaces with ultraviolet light produced with a low-pressure mercury vapor lamp
or light emitting diodes.

Wood JP(1), Archer J(1), Calfee MW(1), Serre S(2), Mickelsen L(2), Mikelonis
A(1), Oudejans L(1), Hu M(1)(3), Hurst S(4), Rastogi VK(5).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development,
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(2)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Land and Emergency Management,
Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.
(3)Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(4)Excet Inc., Springfield, VA, USA.
(5)U.S. Army Chemical Biological Center, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, USA.

AIMS: To obtain quantitative efficacy data of two ultraviolet light (UVC)
technologies for surface inactivation of Bacillus anthracis Ames and Bacillus
atrophaeus spores.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Spores were deposited onto test coupons and controls of four
different materials, via liquid suspension or aerosol deposition. The test
coupons were then exposed to UVC light from either a low-pressure mercury vapor
lamp or a system comprised of light emitting diodes, with a range of dosages.
Positive controls were held at ambient conditions and not exposed to UVC light.
Following exposure to UVC, spores were recovered from the coupons and efficacy
was quantified in terms of log10 reduction (LR) in the number of viable spores
compared to that from positive controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Decontamination efficacy varied by material and UVC dosage (efficacy
up to 5·7 LR was demonstrated). There was no statistical difference in efficacy
between the two species or between inoculation methods. Efficacy improved for the
LED lamp at lower relative humidity, but this effect was not observed with the
mercury vapor lamp.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study will be useful in determining
whether UVC could be used for the inactivation of B. anthracis spores on
different surface types.

Journal of Applied Microbiology © 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14791 
PMID: 32692423 

