
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Sep 4. pii: AEM.01580-20. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01580-20.
[Epub ahead of print]

Bacillus thuringiensis Cry1Ab domain III β-22 mutants with enhanced toxicity to
Spodoptera frugiperda (J. E. Smith).

Gómez I(1), Ocelotl J(1), Sánchez J(1), Aguilar-Medel S(2), Peña-Chora G(3),
Lina-Garcia L(4), Bravo A(1), Soberón M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, Morelos, 
Mexico.
(2)Centro Universitario UAEMex Tenancingo, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de
Mexico, Estado de Mexico, México.
(3)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de
Morelos, Cuernavaca, Morelos Mexico.
(4)Centro de Investigaciones en Biotecnología, Universidad Autónoma del Estado de
Morelos, Cuernavaca, Morelos Mexico.
(5)Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Mexico, Morelos, 
Mexico. mario@ibt.unam.mx.

The fall armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda, is an invasive maize pest that has
spread from the Americas into Africa and Asia causing severe crop damages
worldwide. Most populations of S. frugiperda show low susceptibility to Bacillus 
thuringiensis (Bt) Cry1Ab or Cry1Ac toxins, which have been proved to be
effective against several other lepidopteran pests. In addition, S. frugiperda
has evolved resistance to transgenic maize expressing Cry1Fa toxin. Cry toxins
specificity and toxicity is determined by their binding to different larvae
midgut proteins such as aminopeptidase-N (APN), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and
cadherin (CAD), among other proteins, by means of exposed domain II loop regions 
and also by domain III β16-β22 region. Here we analyzed different Cry1Ab mutants 
in domain III β22 region. The alanine scanning mutagenesis of this region
revealed that all mutants showed increased toxicity against a non-susceptible
Cry1Ab S. frugiperda population. Further analysis of the mutant toxin Cry1AbS587A
revealed that it showed significant increased toxicity, compared to Cry1Ab, to
other three different S. frugiperda populations from Mexico but retained similar 
toxicity to Manduca sexta larvae. The Cry1AbS587A bound to BBMV and its higher
toxicity correlated with a higher binding affinity to APN, ALP and CAD
recombinant proteins. Furthermore, silencing the expression of APN1 and CAD
receptors in S. frugiperda larvae by RNAi showed that Cry1AbS587A toxicity relied
on CAD expression in contrast to Cry1Ab. These data support that the increased
toxicity of Cry1AbS587A to S. frugiperda is in part due to an improved binding
interaction with CAD receptor.IMPORTANCE Spodoptera frugiperda is an important
worldwide pest of maize and rice crops that has evolved resistance to
Cry1Fa-maize in different countries. Therefore, identification of additional
toxins with different mode of action is needed to provide alternative tools to
control this insect pest. Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) Cry1Ab and Cry1Ac toxins
are highly active against several important lepidopteran pests but show variable 
and low toxicity against different S. frugiperda populations. Thus,
identification of Cry1A mutants that gain toxicity to S. frugiperda and retain
toxicity to other pests could be of great value to produce transgenic crops that 
resist a broader spectrum of lepidopteran pests. Here we characterized Cry1Ab
domain III β22 mutants, and we found that Cry1AbS587A mutant display increased
toxicity against different S. frugiperda populations. Thus, Cry1AbS587A could be 
a good toxin candidate to produce transgenic maize with broader efficacy against 
this important insect pests in the field.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01580-20 
PMID: 32887720 

