
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Aug 4;8(8). pii: E1185. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8081185.

Comparative Genome Analysis of Bacillus sporothermodurans with Its Closest
Phylogenetic Neighbor, Bacillus oleronius, and Bacillus cereus and Bacillus
subtilis Groups.

Owusu-Darko R(1), Allam M(2), Ismail A(2), Ferreira CAS(3), Oliveira SD(3), Buys 
EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Consumer and Food Sciences, University of Pretoria, Private Bag 
X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, South Africa.
(2)National Institute for Communicable Diseases, Private Bag X4, Sandringham,
Johannesburg 2131, South Africa.
(3)Laboratory of Immunology and Microbiology, School of Health and Life Sciences,
Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre
90619-900, Brazil.

Bacillus sporothermodurans currently possesses one of the most highly
heat-resistant spores (HRS), which can withstand ultra-high temperature (UHT)
processing. Determination of multiple whole genome sequences of B.
sporothermodurans provided an opportunity to perform the first comparative genome
analysis between strains and with B. oleronius, B. cereus, and B. subtilis
groups. In this study, five whole genome sequences of B. sporothermodurans
strains, including those belonging to the HRS clone (SAD and BR12) normally
isolated from UHT milk, were compared with the aforementioned Bacillus species
for gene clusters responsible for heat resistance. In the phylogenomic analysis, 
B. sporothermodurans, with its closest phylogenetic neighbor, B. oleronius,
clustered with B. thermoamylovorans and B. thermotolerans. Heat shock proteins
GrpE, GroES, GroEL, and DnaK presented identical sequences for all B.
sporothermodurans strains, indicating that differences in functional efficiency
are not involved in the thermal resistance variations. However, comparing all
species evaluated, B. sporothermodurans exhibited a different gene configuration 
in the chromosomal region of the heat shock protein GrpE. Furthermore, only B.
sporothermodurans strains presented the stage II sporulation protein P gene
located in this region. Multisequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of the 
ClpB protein showed differences for HRS and non-HRS strains. The study identified
ClpC, ClpE, and ClpX as the three ATPases putatively involved in protein
disaggregation in B. sporothermodurans. Bacillussporothermodurans exhibits high
homology with other Bacillus species in the DnaK, DnaJ, GroEL, and GroES cluster 
of genes involved in heat resistance. The data presented here pave the way to
select and evaluate the phenotypic effects of genes putatively involved in heat
resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8081185 
PMCID: PMC7464528
PMID: 32759699 

