
1. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2020 Sep 13;156:242-256. doi:
10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.09.016. [Epub ahead of print]

Biofilm forming rhizobacteria enhance growth and salt tolerance in sunflower
plants by stimulating antioxidant enzymes activity.

Yasmeen T(1), Ahmad A(2), Arif MS(2), Mubin M(3), Rehman K(2), Shahzad SM(4),
Iqbal S(5), Rizwan M(2), Ali S(6), Alyemeni MN(7), Wijaya L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Government College
University Faisalabad, 38000, Pakistan. Electronic address:
rida_akash@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Government College
University Faisalabad, 38000, Pakistan.
(3)Centre of Agricultural Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of
Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University College of
Agriculture, University of Sargodha, Sargodha, 40100, Punjab, Pakistan.
(5)Key Laboratory for Economic Plants and Biotechnology, Centre for Mountain
Futures CMF, East and Central Asia Regional Office, World Agroforestry Centre
ICRAF, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan,
CN 650201, China.
(6)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, Government College
University Faisalabad, 38000, Pakistan; Department of Biological Sciences and
Technology, China Medical University, Taichung, 40402, Taiwan. Electronic
address: shafaqataligill@yahoo.com.
(7)Department of Botany and Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud
University, 11451, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Salinity stress is one of the major environmental stresses that impose global
socio-economic impacts, as well as hindering crop productivity. Halotolerant
plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) having potential to cope with
salinity stress can be employed to counter this issue in eco-friendly way. In the
present investigation, halotolerant PGPR strains, AP6 and PB5, were isolated from
saline soil and characterized for their biochemical, molecular and physiological 
traits. Sequencing of 16 S rRNA gene and comparative analysis confirmed the
taxonomic affiliation of AP6 with Bacillus licheniformis and PB5 with Pseudomonas
plecoglossicida. The study was carried out in pots with different levels of
induced soil salinity viz. 0, 5, 10 and 15 dSm-1 to evaluate the potential of
bacterial inoculants in counteracting salinity stress in sunflower at different
plant growth stages (30, 45 and 60 days after sowing). Both the bacterial
inoculants were capable of producing indole acetic acid and biofilm, solubilizing
inorganic rock phosphate, and also expressed ACC deaminase activity. The PGPR
inoculated plants showed significantly higher fresh and dry biomass, plant
height, root length and yield plant-1. Ameliorative significance of applied
bacterial inoculants was also evidenced by mitigating oxidative stress through
upregulation of catalase (CAT), superoxide dismutase (SOD) and guaiacol
peroxidase (GPX) antioxidant enzymes. Increase in photosynthetic pigments, gas
exchange activities and nutrient uptake are crucial salt stress adaptations,
which were enhanced with the inoculation of salt tolerant biofilm producing PGPR 
in sunflower plants. Although increase in salinity stress levels has gradually
decreased the plant's output compared to non-salinized plants, the plants
inoculated with PGPR confronted salinity stress in much better way than
uninoculated plants. Owing to the wide action spectrum of these bacterial
inoculants, it was concluded that these biofilm PGPR could serve as effective
bioinoculants and salinity stress alleviator for sunflower (oil seed crop) by
increasing crop productivity in marginalized agricultural systems.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.09.016 
PMID: 32979797 

