
1. PeerJ. 2020 Jun 26;8:e9408. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9408. eCollection 2020.

Conformational heterogeneity of Savinase from NMR, HDX-MS and X-ray diffraction
analysis.

Wu S(1), Nguyen TTTN(2), Moroz OV(3), Turkenburg JP(3), Nielsen JE(4), Wilson
KS(3), Rand KD(2), Teilum K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology and NMR Laboratory, Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein
Science, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen N, Denmark.
(2)Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen Ø, Denmark.
(3)York Structural Biology Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of
York, York, United Kingdom.
(4)Novozymes A/S, Lyngby, Denmark.

Background: Several examples have emerged of enzymes where slow conformational
changes are of key importance for function and where low populated conformations 
in the resting enzyme resemble the conformations of intermediate states in the
catalytic process. Previous work on the subtilisin protease, Savinase, from
Bacillus lentus by NMR spectroscopy suggested that this enzyme undergoes slow
conformational dynamics around the substrate binding site. However, the
functional importance of such dynamics is unknown.
Methods: Here we have probed the conformational heterogeneity in Savinase by
following the temperature dependent chemical shift changes. In addition, we have 
measured changes in the local stability of the enzyme when the inhibitor
phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride is bound using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass
spectrometry (HDX-MS). Finally, we have used X-ray crystallography to compare
electron densities collected at cryogenic and ambient temperatures and searched
for possible low populated alternative conformations in the crystals.
Results: The NMR temperature titration shows that Savinase is most flexible
around the active site, but no distinct alternative states could be identified.
The HDX shows that modification of Savinase with inhibitor has very little impact
on the stability of hydrogen bonds and solvent accessibility of the backbone. The
most pronounced structural heterogeneities detected in the diffraction data are
limited to alternative side-chain rotamers and a short peptide segment that has
an alternative main-chain conformation in the crystal at cryo conditions.
Collectively, our data show that there is very little structural heterogeneity in
the resting state of Savinase and hence that Savinase does not rely on
conformational selection to drive the catalytic process.

©2020 Wu et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9408 
PMCID: PMC7323712
PMID: 32617193 

Conflict of interest statement: Jens E. Nielsen is employed by Novozymes A/S.

