
1. Pol J Microbiol. 2020;69:1-11. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2020-004.

Assessing the Microbial Communities in Four Different Daqus by Using PCR-DGGE,
PLFA, and Biolog Analyses.

Ling Y(1), Li W(2), Tong T(1), Li Z(1), Li Q(1), Bai Z(3), Wang G(4), Chen J(4), 
Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Biochemical Engineering , Beijing Union University , Beijing ,
China.
(2)College of Liberal Arts and Sciences , National University of Defense
Technology , Changsha , China.
(3)Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences , Chinese Academy of Sciences ,
Beijing , China.
(4)Hunan Wuling Spirits Co., Ltd. , Changde , China.

Daqu made from raw wheat, barley or pea is used as an inoculum for the
fermentation of Chinese Baijiu. In this study, the microbial communities of four 
different types of Daqus (sauce-flavor Wuling Daqu, sauce and strong-flavor
Baisha Daqu, strong-flavor Deshan Daqu, and light-flavor Niulanshan Daqu) were
analyzed by polymerase chain reaction-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
(PCR-DGGE), phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) analysis, and Biolog EcoPlates
analysis (Biolog). Clear differences were seen between the microbial communities 
of the four Daqus. PCR-DGGE showed differences in the number and brightness of
bands between the Daqus, indicating the presence of unique bacterial species in
Deshan Daqu, Wuling Daqu, and Niulanshan Daqu. Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis,
Bacillus thermoamylovorans, and some unclassified bacteria were unique to Wuling 
Daqu, Deshan Daqu, and Niulanshan Daqu, respectively. Moreover, some bacterial
species were observed in all four Daqus. A total of 26 PLFAs between C12 to C20
were detected from the four Daqus by PLFA analysis. Wuling Daqu had the highest
total and fungal biomasses, Baisha Daqu had the highest bacterial biomass, and
Niulanshan Daqu had the highest ratio of fungal biomass to bacterial biomass. The
Biolog results indicated differences in the carbon source use and mode of the
four Daqus, and also demonstrated that each Daqu had varying abilities to utilize
different types of carbon sources. The cluster analysis of the three methods
showed that the microbial communities of the four Daqus were different. This
study also demonstrates the applicability of the three analytical methods in the 
evaluating of the microbial communities of Daqus.Daqu made from raw wheat, barley
or pea is used as an inoculum for the fermentation of Chinese Baijiu. In this
study, the microbial communities of four different types of Daqus (sauce-flavor
Wuling Daqu, sauce and strong-flavor Baisha Daqu, strong-flavor Deshan Daqu, and 
light-flavor Niulanshan Daqu) were analyzed by polymerase chain
reaction-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (PCR-DGGE), phospholipid fatty
acid (PLFA) analysis, and Biolog EcoPlates analysis (Biolog). Clear differences
were seen between the microbial communities of the four Daqus. PCR-DGGE showed
differences in the number and brightness of bands between the Daqus, indicating
the presence of unique bacterial species in Deshan Daqu, Wuling Daqu, and
Niulanshan Daqu. Lactobacillus sanfranciscensis, Bacillus thermoamylovorans, and 
some unclassified bacteria were unique to Wuling Daqu, Deshan Daqu, and
Niulanshan Daqu, respectively. Moreover, some bacterial species were observed in 
all four Daqus. A total of 26 PLFAs between C12 to C20 were detected from the
four Daqus by PLFA analysis. Wuling Daqu had the highest total and fungal
biomasses, Baisha Daqu had the highest bacterial biomass, and Niulanshan Daqu had
the highest ratio of fungal biomass to bacterial biomass. The Biolog results
indicated differences in the carbon source use and mode of the four Daqus, and
also demonstrated that each Daqu had varying abilities to utilize different types
of carbon sources. The cluster analysis of the three methods showed that the
microbial communities of the four Daqus were different. This study also
demonstrates the applicability of the three analytical methods in the evaluating 
of the microbial communities of Daqus.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2020-004 
PMCID: PMC7256838
PMID: 32067441 

