
1. Insects. 2020 Sep 1;11(9). pii: E581. doi: 10.3390/insects11090581.

Modern Techniques in Colorado Potato Beetle (Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say)
Control and Resistance Management: History Review and Future Perspectives.

Kadoić Balaško M(1), Mikac KM(2), Bažok R(1), Lemic D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural Zoology, Faculty of Agriculture, University of
Zagreb, Svetošimunska 25, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Centre for Sustainable Ecosystem Solutions, School of Earth, Atmospheric and
Life Sciences, Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, University of Wollongong,
Wollongong 2522, Australia.

Colorado potato beetle, CPB (Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say), is one of the most
important pests of the potato globally. Larvae and adults can cause complete
defoliation of potato plant leaves and can lead to a large yield loss. The insect
has been successfully suppressed by insecticides; however, over time, has
developed resistance to insecticides from various chemical groups, and its once
successful control has diminished. The number of available active chemical
control substances is decreasing with the process of testing, and registering new
products on the market are time-consuming and expensive, with the possibility of 
resistance ever present. All of these concerns have led to the search for new
methods to control CPB and efficient tools to assist with the detection of
resistant variants and monitoring of resistant populations. Current strategies
that may aid in slowing resistance include gene silencing by RNA interference
(RNAi). RNAi, besides providing an efficient tool for gene functional studies,
represents a safe, efficient, and eco-friendly strategy for CPB control.
Genetically modified (GM) crops that produce the toxins of Bacillus thuringiensis
(Bt) have many advantages over agro-technical, mechanical, biological, and
chemical measures. However, pest resistance that may occur and public acceptance 
of GM modified food crops are the main problems associated with Bt crops. Recent 
developments in the speed, cost, and accuracy of next generation sequencing are
revolutionizing the discovery of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and field
of population genomics. There is a need for effective resistance monitoring
programs that are capable of the early detection of resistance and successful
implementation of integrated resistance management (IRM). The main focus of this 
review is on new technologies for CPB control (RNAi) and tools (SNPs) for
detection of resistant CPB populations.

DOI: 10.3390/insects11090581 
PMID: 32882790 

