
1. J Food Prot. 2020 Sep 25. doi: 10.4315/JFP-20-196. [Epub ahead of print]

The growth characteristics of Bacillus cereus in sake and during its manufacture.

Takahashi M(1), Kita Y, Minakami R, Mukai N.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of brewing, Japan Senior researcher Brewing
Microbiology Devision 3-7-1 Kagamiyama JAPAN Higashi-hiroshima Hiroshima 7390042.

Sake (Japanese rice wine) has been recognized as being low-risk in terms of its
microbiological safety. However, a confirmation of the food safety aspects of
sake based on scientific evidence is important for establishing consumer
confidence, in part because consumer concerns regarding food safety have
increased. The presence of Bacillus cereus spores in refined rice wine has been
reported, and in light of consumers' growing concern over food safety, the
establishment of food and beverage safety is important for consumers'
reassurance. Herein, to confirm the microbiological safety of sake, we
investigated the content and growth of B. cereus. We conducted a spore addition
test to determine whether B. cereus spores grow during sake production, and we
observed no growth or germination of B. cereus spores during the manufacturing
process. We also observed that processes such as solid-liquid separation and
filtration help remove the risk posed by B. cereus. We then conducted a survey to
assess the density of B. cereus in various commercial sake products. We analyzed 
162 samples of commercial sake and observed that 11 of the products had ≥1 CFU of
living cells in 1 mL of sake (detection rate: 6.8%). There was no product in
which ≥100 CFU/mL-sake of living cells was detected. Our findings confirmed that 
the density of these bacteria in sake is lower than that in other foods, and the 
probability of infection is very low. The emetic toxin produced by B. cereus was 
not detected in any of the sake samples. This is the first study based on
experimental data demonstrating that B. cereus is not able to grow in sake or
during the sake manufacturing process. We thus conclude that the safety risk of
B. cereus in sake is negligible. Our findings indicate that Bacillus cereus is
not a significant hazard in the sake brewing process, and they will contribute to
the food hygiene management based on scientific evidence in sake breweries.

DOI: 10.4315/JFP-20-196 
PMID: 32977335 

