
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2020 Sep 28. doi: 10.1002/ps.6106. [Epub ahead of print]

ABC transporter mutations in Cry1F-resistant fall armyworm (Spodoptera
frugiperda) do not result in altered susceptibility to selected small molecule
pesticides.

Abdelgaffar H(1), Perera OP(2), Jurat-Fuentes JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, University of Tennessee,
Knoxville, TN, 37996, USA.
(2)Southern Insect Management Research Unit, USDA, Agricultural Research Service,
Stoneville, MS, 38776.

BACKGROUND: Transgenic crops producing Cry and Vip3 insecticidal proteins from
the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis provide effective control of the fall
armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda J. E. Smith. However, cases of practical S.
frugiperda resistance to transgenic corn producing Cry1F, Cry1Ab and Cry1A.105
proteins have been reported in the Western hemisphere. Importantly, S. frugiperda
resistance to Cry1F corn in Puerto Rico was previously associated with lower
susceptibility to synthetic pesticides. When characterized, resistance to
transgenic corn in S. frugiperda involved alterations in an ABC transporter
subfamily C2 (SfABCC2) gene. The main goal of this work was to test the role of
mutations in SfABCC2 that result in resistance to Cry1F in susceptibility to
synthetic and semi-synthetic small molecule pesticides.
RESULTS: Marginal but significantly reduced susceptibility to bifenthrin and
increased susceptibility to spinetoram was detected in a Cry1F-resitant S.
frugiperda strain from Puerto Rico carrying a frameshift mutation in the SfABCC2 
gene. Gene editing by CRISPR/Cas9 created a SfABCC2 knockout in a laboratory
reference S. frugiperda strain. When compared to the parental reference, the
knockout strain displayed 25-fold resistance to Cry1F but no alteration in
susceptibility to small molecule pesticides.
CONCLUSION: These results support that resistance to Cry1F due to mutations in
the SfABCC2 gene do not affect susceptibility to the tested small molecule
pesticides. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6106 
PMID: 32985759 

