
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 12;11:1965. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01965. eCollection 
2020.

Hydrolytic Profile of the Culturable Gut Bacterial Community Associated With
Hermetia illucens.

Callegari M(1)(2), Jucker C(1), Fusi M(2)(3), Leonardi MG(1), Daffonchio D(2),
Borin S(1), Savoldelli S(1), Crotti E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze per gli Alimenti, la Nutrizione e l'Ambiente (DeFENS),
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Red Sea Research Center (RSRC), King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(3)School of Applied Sciences, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Larvae of the black soldier fly (BSF) Hermetia illucens (L.) convert organic
waste into high valuable insect biomass that can be used as alternative protein
source for animal nutrition or as feedstock for biodiesel production. Since
insect biology and physiology are influenced by the gut microbiome, knowledge
about the functional role of BSF-associated microorganisms could be exploited to 
enhance the insect performance and growth. Although an increasing number of
culture-independent studies are unveiling the microbiota structure and
composition of the BSF gut microbiota, a knowledge gap remains on the
experimental validation of the contribution of the microorganisms to the insect
growth and development. We aimed at assessing if BSF gut-associated bacteria
potentially involved in the breakdown of diet components are able to improve host
nutrition. A total of 193 bacterial strains were obtained from guts of BSF larvae
reared on a nutritious diet using selective and enrichment media. Most of the
bacterial isolates are typically found in the insect gut, with major
representatives belonging to the Gammaproteobacteria and Bacilli classes. The
hydrolytic profile of the bacterial collection was assessed on compounds
typically present in the diet. Finally, we tested the hypothesis that the
addition to a nutritionally poor diet of the two isolates Bacillus licheniformis 
HI169 and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia HI121, selected for their complementary
metabolic activities, could enhance BSF growth. B. licheniformis HI169 positively
influenced the larval final weight and growth rate when compared to the control. 
Conversely, the addition of S. maltophilia HI121 to the nutritionally poor diet
did not result in a growth enhancement in terms of larval weight and pupal weight
and length in comparison to the control, whereas the combination of the two
strains positively affected the larval final weight and the pupal weight and
length. In conclusion, we isolated BSF-associated bacterial strains with
potential positive properties for the host nutrition and we showed that selected 
isolates may enhance BSF growth, suggesting the importance to evaluate the effect
of the bacterial administration on the insect performance.

Copyright © 2020 Callegari, Jucker, Fusi, Leonardi, Daffonchio, Borin, Savoldelli
and Crotti.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01965 
PMCID: PMC7434986
PMID: 32903451 

