
1. Physiol Plant. 2020 Sep 19. doi: 10.1111/ppl.13212. [Epub ahead of print]

Appraising the potential of EPS-producing rhizobacteria with ACC-deaminase
activity to improve growth and physiology of maize under drought stress.

Nadeem SM(1), Ahmad M(2), Tufail MA(3), Asghar HN(3), Nazli F(4), Zahir ZA(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Agriculture Faisalabad, Sub-campus Burewala-, Vehari, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Soil Science, the Islamia University of Bahawalpur, Bahawalpur, 
63100, Pakistan.
(3)Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture,
Faisalabad, 38040, Pakistan.
(4)Pesticide Quality Control Laboratory, Bahawalpur, Punjab Agriculture
Department, Government of Punjab, Pakistan.

Rhizobacteria containing 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid-deaminase
(ACC-deaminase) and exopolysaccharides (EPS) activity are important to induce
stress tolerance in plants. The present study was conducted to screen and
characterize plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) with ACC-deaminase and
EPS-producing activity for improving maize growth under drought stress.
Eighty-five rhizobacterial strains were isolated from the rain-fed areas, among
those sixty-nine isolates were able to utilize ACC and thirty-one strains were
found positive for EPS production. These strains containing ACC-deaminase and/or 
EPS-producing activity were subjected to drought tolerance assay by inducing
water stress in media using polyethylene glycol (PEG) 6000. Based on results of
the drought tolerance bioassay, twelve most prominent strains were selected to
evaluate their growth promoting abilities in maize under water stressed
conditions by conducting jar trial. The impact of strains on maize growth
parameters was variable. Strains with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and
EPS-producing activity showed comparatively better results than those with either
ACC-deaminase or EPS-producing activity only. These strains were also
significantly better in improving the plant physiological parameters including
photosynthesis rate, stomatal conductance, vapor pressure, water use efficiency, 
and transpiration rate. The strain D3 with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and
EPS-producing activity was significantly better in colonizing maize roots,
improving plant growth, and physiological parameters. The strain was named as
Bacillus velezensis strain D3 (Accession number MT367633) as confirmed through
results of 16S rRNA partial gene sequencing. It is concluded that the strains
with co-existence of ACC-deaminase and EPS-producing activity could be better
suited for improving crop growth and physiology under drought stress. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/ppl.13212 
PMID: 32949405 

