
1. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2020 Sep 29. doi: 10.1111/jpn.13454. [Epub ahead
of print]

Probiotics in poultry feed: A comprehensive review.

Abd El-Hack ME(1), El-Saadony MT(2), Shafi ME(3), Qattan SYA(4), Batiha GE(5)(6),
Khafaga AF(7), Abdel-Moneim AE(8), Alagawany M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig,
Egypt.
(2)Agricultural Microbiology Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig
University, Zagazig, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Zoology, Abdulaziz University, Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Abdulaziz
University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)National Research Center for Protozoan Diseases, Obihiro University of
Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, Japan.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Damanhour University, Damanhour, Al-Beheira, Egypt.
(7)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Alexandria
University, Edfina, Egypt.
(8)Biological Application Department, Nuclear Research Center, Atomic Energy
Authority, Abu-Zaabal, Egypt.

The use of antibiotics to maintain animal well-being, promote growth and improve 
efficiency has been practised for more than 50 years. However, as early as the
1950s, researchers identified concern on the development of resistant bacteria
for the antibiotics streptomycin and tetracycline used in turkeys and broilers
respectively. These findings laid the groundwork for agricultural officials to
impose stricter regulatory parameters on the use of antibiotics in poultry feeds.
Probiotics are live micro-organisms included in the diet of animals as feed
additives or supplements. Commonly known as a direct-fed microbial, probiotics
provide beneficial properties to the host, primarily through action in the
gastrointestinal tract (GIT) of the animal. Supplementation of probiotics in the 
diet can improve animal health and performance, through contributions to gut
health and nutrient use. For instance, supplementation of probiotics has been
demonstrated to benefit farm animals in immune modulation, structural modulation 
and increased cytokine production, which positively affect the intestinal mucosal
lining against pathogens. Bacillus subtilis has been a popular bacterium used
within the industry and was shown to improve intestinal villus height. Increasing
the villus height and structure of the crypts in the GIT allows for the
improvement of nutrient digestion and absorption. Tight junctions maintain
important defences against pathogenic bacteria and cellular homeostasis. Heat
stress can be a major environmental challenge in the poultry industry. Heat
stress causes the bird to fluctuate its internal core temperature beyond their
comfort zone. To overcome such challenges, poultry will attempt to balance its
heat production and dissipation through behavioural and physiological adaptation 
mechanisms.

© 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/jpn.13454 
PMID: 32996177 

