
1. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2020 Jan;33(1):135-139.

Cytotoxic, α-amylase inhibitory and thrombolytic activities of organic and
aqueous extracts of Bacillus clausii KP10.

Nighat F(1), Mushtaq Z(2), Maqsood M(1), Shahid M(3), Hanif MA(4), Jamil A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bioactive Molecules Research Lab (BMRL), Department of Biochemistry,
University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(2)Bioactive Molecules Research Lab (BMRL), Department of Biochemistry,
University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan/Molecular Biochemistry Lab,
Department of Biochemistry, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(3)Medicinal Biochemistry Research Laboratory, University of Agriculture,
Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(5)Molecular Biochemistry Lab, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Agriculture, Faisalabad, Pakistan.

Humans are experiencing serious health issues like myocardial infarction and
diabetes. Thrombosis is the reason of myocardial infarction that may cause death.
Bioactive compounds or enzymes can be used to dissolve the clot. Whereas diabetes
is a disorder of metabolism in which the level of glucose in blood becomes high. 
It can be controlled by inhibiting α-amylase enzyme. The current project was,
therefore planned to investigate the thrombolytic, α-amylase inhibitory and
cytotoxic (to access drug safety) potentials of the organic and aqueous bioactive
fractions of Bacillus clausii KP10. The cytotoxicity was assessed with hemolytic 
assay, α-amylase inhibition assay was done by using DNS and in-vitro thrombolytic
effect was checked with human blood. In our experiments, the maximum hemolytic
activity was shown by ethyl acetate fraction (12.64%). Results were compared with
standard Triton X-100 which showed 91.61% hemolytic activity whereas all other
fractions showed least cytotoxic activity. The extracts were also evaluated as
thrombolytic agents as correlated to streptokinase (73.83%). All the extracts
showed clot lysis activity, among which water soluble fraction exhibited maximum 
(35.16%) clot lysis activity. In our experiment methanol soluble fraction of B.
clausii KP10 showed maximum 26.49% α-amylase inhibitory activity. Results were
analyzed statistically through analysis of variance (ANOVA).


PMID: 32122841 

