
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Jun;100(8):3544-3553. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10405. Epub 2020
Apr 14.

Microbiota stratification and succession of amylase-producing Bacillus in
traditional Chinese Jiuqu (fermentation starters).

Wang ZM(1)(2)(3), Wang CT(4), Shen CH(5), Wang ST(5), Mao JQ(6), Li Z(7), Gänzle 
M(7), Mao J(3)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Agriculture and Food Engineering, Shandong University of Technology,
Zibo, China.
(2)National Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation Technology, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, China.
(3)School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, China.
(4)Beijing Engineering and Technology Research Center of Food Additives, Beijing 
Technology & Business University (BTBU), Beijing, China.
(5)National Engineering Research Center of Solid-State Brewing, Luzhou, China.
(6)College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, University of California,
Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(8)Synergetic Innovation Center of Food Safety and Nutrition, Wuxi, China.

BACKGROUND: Jiuqu are vital saccharifying and fermenting agents for Chinese
fermented foods. Natural ventilation during Jiuqu fermentation causes changes in 
temperature, oxygen and moisture content, resulting in mass and heat gradients
from the outer to inner areas of Jiuqu blocks. In the present study, microbiota
stratification in Jiuqu was investigated by single molecule real-time sequencing 
and culture isolation. The contributors of Bacillus to amylase activity of Jiuqu 
and the dynamics of their biomass during Jiuqu fermentation were also analyzed.
RESULTS: The dominant orders, genera and species between the inner and outer
layers of Huangjiu qu (HJQ) were similar, although they displayed greater
variance in two layers of Baijiu qu (BJQ). Bacillus possessed the highest
diversity (including 27 species) in Jiuqu. Bacillus licheniformis, Bacillus
altitudinis, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and Bacillus
megaterium were most prevalent in HJQ, whereas B. licheniformis, B.
amyloliquefaciens and Bacillus cereus were dominant in BJQ. Isolates of B.
amyloliquefaciens, B. subtilis and B. cereus exhibited high activities of amylase
and glucoamylase. Quantification of Bacillus members possessing genes of
α-amylase revealed that B. cereus and B. licheniformis were the most dominant
microbes to secret α-amylase in Jiuqu and their biomass were increasing during
Jiuqu fermentation.
CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrates the microbial distribution in
different layers of Jiuqu and clarifies the Bacillus species processing the
activity of α-amylase. These results will help industries control the quality of 
Jiuqu by rationally selecting starters and optimizing their microbiota. © 2020
Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10405 
PMID: 32242927 

