
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 28;15(8):e0238252. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238252.
eCollection 2020.

Environmental gut bacteria in European honey bees (Apis mellifera) from Australia
and their relationship to the chalkbrood disease.

Khan S(1), Somerville D(2), Frese M(3), Nayudu M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia.
(2)NSW Department of Primary Industries, Goulburn, NSW, Australia.
(3)Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Canberra, Canberra,
Australia.

We report on aerobic "environmental" bacteria isolated from European honey bees
(Apis mellifera). We determined the number of culturable aerobic bacteria in the 
gut of nurse bees sampled from locations around Australia. Bees from healthy
colonies had 107-108 aerobic bacteria per g of bee gut, while bees from colonies 
with chalkbrood consistently had significantly fewer bacteria (104-105 bacteria
per g). When colonies recovered from chalkbrood, bacterial numbers returned to
normal levels, suggesting that counting aerobic bacteria in the gut could be used
to predict an outbreak of the disease. Furthermore, Western Australian bees from 
the "Better Bees" program (bred to promote hygienic behaviour) had significantly 
higher numbers of aerobic gut bacteria compared to regular bees from healthy
colonies. Bacteria with the ability to inhibit the chalkbrood pathogen were found
in most bees from regular colonies (> 60%) but only in a few "Better Bees" (10%).
Phylogenetic analysis of aerobic bacterial isolates that inhibited the chalkbrood
pathogen revealed a close relationship (>97% sequence identity) to the genera
Bacillus, Klebsiella, Pantoea, Hafnia, and Enterobacter (bacteria that have
previously been isolated from honey bees), but we also isolated Maccrococcus and 
Frigoribacterium species (bacteria that were not previously identified in bees). 
Finally, we investigated the ability of bacteria to inhibit the chalkbrood fungus
Ascosphaera apis. Mass spectroscopy analysis revealed that the bee gut isolates
Frigoribacterium sp. and Bacillus senegalensis produce gluconic acid. We further 
found that this simple sugar is involved in chalkbrood fungal hyphal lysis and
cytoplasmic leakage. Our findings suggest that "environmental" gut bacteria may
help bees to control the chalkbrood pathogen.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238252 
PMCID: PMC7455043
PMID: 32857797 

Conflict of interest statement: AgriFutures (formerly known as Rural Industry
Research & Development Corporation) is an Australian government body that funds
basic and applied research. Therefore, AgriFutures should not be considered a
“commercial funder”. We confirm that the involvement of AgriFutures “does not
alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials”

