
1. Pest Manag Sci. 2020 Aug 25. doi: 10.1002/ps.6064. [Epub ahead of print]

Field evaluation of biocontrol agents against black-foot and Petri diseases of
grapevine.

Del Pilar Martínez-Diz M(1)(2), Díaz-Losada E(1), Andrés-Sodupe M(3), Bujanda
R(3), Maldonado-González MM(3), Ojeda S(3), Yacoub A(4), Rey P(4), Gramaje D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Estación de Viticultura e Enoloxía de Galicia (AGACAL-EVEGA), Ourense, Spain.
(2)Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña, A Coruña, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Ciencias de la Vid y del Vino (ICVV), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad de la Rioja, Gobierno de La Rioja,
Logroño, Spain.
(4)INRA, ISVV, UMR1065 SAVE, Villenave d'Ornon, France.

BACKGROUND: Black-foot and Petri diseases are the main fungal diseases associated
with young grapevine decline. Two field experiments were established to evaluate 
the preventive effect of two potential biocontrol agents (BCAs), that is
Streptomyces sp. E1 + R4 and Pythium oligandrum Po37, and three BCA-commercial
products containing Trichoderma atroviride SC1, Trichoderma koningii TK7 and
Pseudomonas fluorescens + Bacillus atrophaeus on fungal infection in grafted
plants and plant growth parameters.
RESULTS: The effectiveness of some BCA in reducing the incidence and severity of 
both diseases was dependent on the plant part analyzed and the plant age. No
single BCA application was able to control both diseases. Streptomyces sp.
E1 + R4 were able to reduce significantly the infection of the most prevalent
black-foot disease fungi while P. oligandrum Po37 and Trichoderma spp. were able 
to reduce significantly Phaeomoniella chlamydospora and Phaeoacremonium minimum
(Petri disease) infection. BCA treatments had no effect on the shoot weight, and 
root weight was significantly lower in all BCA treatments with respect to the
control.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of the disease-suppressive activity of two or more
beneficial microbes in a biocontrol preparation is required to prevent infection 
by black-foot and Petri disease fungi in vineyards.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/ps.6064 
PMID: 32841479 

