
1. J Contam Hydrol. 2020 Aug 29;235:103707. doi: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2020.103707.
[Epub ahead of print]

Laboratory results and mathematical modeling of spore surface interactions in
stormwater runoff.

Mikelonis AM(1), Ratliff K(2), Youn S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Office of Research and Development, Center for Environmental Solutions and
Emergency Response, Homeland Security and Materials Management Division, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 109 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA. Electronic address: mikelonis.anne@epa.gov.
(2)Office of Research and Development, Center for Environmental Solutions and
Emergency Response, Homeland Security and Materials Management Division, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, 109 T.W. Alexander Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.
(3)Marshall University, Department of Civil Engineering, College of Engineering
and Computer Sciences, 1 John Marshall Drive, Huntington, WV 25755, United
States.

Development of numerical models to predict stormwater-mediated transport of
pathogenic spores in the environment depends on an understanding of adhesion
forces that dictate detachment after rain events. Zeta potential values were
measured in the laboratory for Bacillus globigii and Bacillus thuringiensis
kurstaki, two common surrogates used to represent Bacillus anthracis, in
synthetic baseline ultrapure water and laboratory prepared stormwater. Zeta
potential curves were also determined for materials representative of urban
infrastructure (concrete and asphalt). These data were used to predict the
interaction energy between the spores and urban materials using
Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (DLVO) modeling. B. globigii and B.
thuringiensis kurstaki sourced from Yakibou Inc., were found to have similar zeta
potential curves, whereas spores sourced from the U.S. military's Dugway
laboratory were found to diverge. In the ultrapure water, the modeling results
use the laboratory data to demonstrate that the energy barriers between the
spores and the urban materials were tunable through compression of the electrical
double layer of the spores via changes of ionic strength and pH of the water. In 
the runoff water, charge neutralization dominated surface processes. The cations,
metals, and natural organic matter (NOM) in the runoff water contributed to
equalizing the zeta potential values for Dugway B. globigii and B. thuringiensis 
kurstaki, and drastically modified the surface of the concrete and asphalt. All
DLVO energy curves using the runoff water were repulsive. The highest energy
barrier predicted in this study was for Dugway B. globigii spores interacting
with a concrete surface in runoff water, suggesting that this would be the most
challenging combination to detach through water-based decontamination.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jconhyd.2020.103707 
PMID: 32916588 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

