
1. Appl Biosaf. 2020 Jun 19;25(2):1-14. doi: 10.1177/1535676020926975.

Decontamination of Bacillus Spores with Formaldehyde Vapor under Varied
Environmental Conditions.

Choi YW(1), Sunderman MM(1), McCauley MW(1), Richter WR(1), Willenberg ZJ(1),
Wood J(2), Serre S(2), Mickelsen L(2), Willison S(3), Rupert R(4), Muñiz-Ortiz
JG(5), Casey S(6), Calfee MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Battelle Memorial Institute, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)US Environmental Protection Agency, TW Alexander Drive, Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA.
(3)US Environmental Protection Agency, Cincinnati, OH.
(4)US Environmental Protection Agency, Region 3, Philadelphia, PA.
(5)US Environmental Protection Agency, Arlington, VA.
(6)United Kingdom, Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, CBRN
Recovery Team, Stafford, England.

Introduction: This study investigated formaldehyde decontamination efficacy
against dried Bacillus spores on porous and non-porous test surfaces, under
various environmental conditions. This knowledge will help responders determine
effective formaldehyde exposure parameters to decontaminate affected spaces
following a biological agent release.
Methods: Prescribed masses of paraformaldehyde or formalin were sublimated or
evaporated, respectively, to generate formaldehyde vapor within a bench-scale
test chamber. Adsorbent cartridges were used to measure formaldehyde vapor
concentrations in the chamber at pre-determined times. A validated method was
used to extract the cartridges and analyze for formaldehyde via liquid
chromatography. Spores of Bacillus globigii, Bacillus thuringiensis, and Bacillus
anthracis were inoculated and dried onto porous bare pine wood and non-porous
painted concrete material coupons. A series of tests was conducted where
temperature, relative humidity, and formaldehyde concentration were varied, to
determine treatment efficacy outside of conditions where this decontaminant is
well-characterized (laboratory temperature and humidity and 12 mg/L theoretical
formaldehyde vapor concentration) to predict decontamination efficacy in
applications that may arise following a biological incident.
Results: Low temperature trials (approximately 10°C) resulted in decreased
formaldehyde air concentrations throughout the 48-hour time-course when compared 
with formaldehyde concentrations collected in the ambient temperature trials
(approximately 22°C). Generally, decontamination efficacy on wood was lower for
all three spore types compared with painted concrete. Also, higher recoveries
resulted from painted concrete compared to wood, consistent with historical data 
on these materials. The highest decontamination efficacies were observed on the
spores subjected to the longest exposures (48 hours) on both materials, with
efficacies that gradually decreased with shorter exposures. Adsorption or
absorption of the formaldehyde vapor may have been a factor, especially during
the low temperature trials, resulting in less available formaldehyde in the air
when measured.
Conclusion: Environmental conditions affect formaldehyde concentrations in the
air and thereby affect decontamination efficacy. Efficacy is also impacted by the
material with which the contaminants are in contact.

DOI: 10.1177/1535676020926975 
PMCID: PMC7511015 [Available on 2021-06-19]
PMID: 32982605 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST No conflict of interest
declared.

