
1. EFSA J. 2020 Jun 25;18(6):e06158. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6158. eCollection 2020
Jun.

Safety and efficacy of TechnoSpore® (Bacillus coagulans DSM 32016) for piglets,
other growing Suidae, chickens for fattening, other poultry for fattening and
ornamental birds.

EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP), 
Bampidis V, Azimonti G, Bastos ML, Christensen H, Dusemund B, Kouba M, Kos
Durjava M, López-Alonso M, López Puente S, Marcon F, Mayo B, Pechová A, Petkova
M, Ramos F, Sanz Y, Villa RE, Woutersen R, Dierick N, Martelli G, Cocconcelli PS,
Glandorf B, Herman L, Prieto Maradona M, Saarela M, Anguita M, Brozzi R.

Following a request from the European Commission, the Panel on Additives and
Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP) was asked to deliver a
scientific opinion on the safety and efficacy of TechnoSpore® (Bacillus coagulans
DSM 32016), when used as a zootechnical additive for piglets (suckling and
weaned), other growing Suidae, chickens for fattening, other poultry for
fattening and ornamental birds. The bacterial species present in the additive is 
considered suitable for the qualified presumption of safety approach to safety
assessment. The identity of the active agent was established and the lack of
toxigenic potential confirmed. B. coagulans DSM 32016 did not show resistance to 
antibiotics of human and veterinary importance, and therefore, was presumed safe 
for the target species, consumers of products derived from animals Fed the
additive and the environment. Since the other components of the additive did not 
give rise to concerns, TechnoSpore® was also considered safe for the target
species, consumer and the environment. The additive is not a skin/eye irritant or
a skin sensitiser but should be considered a respiratory sensitiser. TechnoSpore®
showed the potential to be efficacious as a zootechnical additive in weaned
piglets and chickens for fattening at 1 × 109 CFU/kg complete feed. This
conclusion was extended to suckling piglets and extrapolated to other growing
Suidae at the same physiological stage and to other birds for fattening and
ornamental birds at the same use level. B. coagulans DSM 32016 included in
Technospore® is compatible with halofuginone and diclazuril. The Panel could not 
conclude on the compatibility of the additive with monensin sodium, decoquinate, 
robenidine hydrochloride, lasalocid sodium, narasin, salinomycin sodium,
maduramicin ammonium, nicarbazin and narasin/nicarbazin.

© 2020 European Food Safety Authority. EFSA Journal published by John Wiley and
Sons Ltd on behalf of European Food Safety Authority.

DOI: 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6158 
PMCID: PMC7448007
PMID: 32874333 

