
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jun 17;86(13). pii: e00405-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00405-20. Print 2020 Jun 17.

A Soluble Fiber Diet Increases Bacteroides fragilis Group Abundance and
Immunoglobulin A Production in the Gut.

Nakajima A(1), Sasaki T(2), Itoh K(3), Kitahara T(4), Takema Y(4), Hiramatsu
K(5), Ishikawa D(6), Shibuya T(6), Kobayashi O(6), Osada T(6), Watanabe S(6),
Nagahara A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan anakaji@juntendo.ac.jp.
(2)Animal Research Center, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.
(3)Biotechnical Center, Japan SLC, Inc., Shizuoka, Japan.
(4)Kao Corporation, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Center of Excellence for Infection Control Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Juntendo University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is essential for defense of the intestinal mucosa against 
harmful pathogens. Previous studies have shown that Bacteroidetes, the major
phylum of gut microbiota together with Firmicutes, impact IgA production.
However, the relative abundances of species of Bacteroidetes responsible for IgA 
production were not well understood. In the present study, we identified some
specific Bacteroidetes species that were associated with gut IgA induction by
hsp60-based profiling of species distribution among Bacteroidetes The levels of
IgA and the expression of the gene encoding activation-induced cytidine deaminase
(AID) in the large intestine lamina propria, which is crucial for class switch
recombination from IgM to IgA, were increased in soluble high-fiber diet
(sHFD)-fed mice. We found that Bacteroides acidifaciens was the most abundant
Bacteroidetes species in both sHFD- and normal diet-fed mice. In addition, the
gut IgA levels were associated with the relative abundance of Bacteroides
fragilis group species such as Bacteroides faecis, Bacteroides caccae, and
Bacteroides acidifaciens Conversely, the ratio of B. acidifaciens to other
Bacteroidetes species was reduced in insoluble high-fiber diet fed- and no-fiber 
diet-fed mice. To investigate whether B. acidifaciens increases IgA production,
we generated B. acidifaciens monoassociated mice and found increased gut IgA
production and AID expression. Collectively, soluble dietary fiber increases the 
ratio of gut Bacteroides fragilis group, such as B. acidifaciens, and IgA
production. This might improve gut immune function, thereby protecting against
bowel pathogens and reducing the incidence of inflammatory bowel
diseases.IMPORTANCE Immunoglobulin A (IgA) is essential for defense of the
intestinal mucosa against harmful pathogens. Gut microbiota impact IgA
production, but the specific species responsible for IgA production remain
largely elusive. Previous studies have shown that IgA and Bacteroidetes, the
major phyla of gut microbiota, were increased in soluble high-fiber diet-fed
mice. We show here that the levels of IgA in the gut and the expression of
activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID) in the large intestine lamina
propria, which is crucial for class switch recombination from IgM to IgA, were
correlated with the abundance of Bacteroides fragilis group species such as
Bacteroides faecis, Bacteroides caccae, and Bacteroides acidifaciens B.
acidifaciens monoassociated mice increased gut IgA production and AID expression.
Soluble dietary fiber may improve gut immune function, thereby protecting against
bowel pathogens and reducing inflammatory bowel diseases.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00405-20 
PMCID: PMC7301863 [Available on 2020-12-17]
PMID: 32332136 

