
1. mBio. 2020 Jun 23;11(3). pii: e00729-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00729-20.

Capsular Polysaccharide Cross-Regulation Modulates Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron
Biofilm Formation.

Béchon N(#)(1)(2), Mihajlovic J(#)(1)(2), Vendrell-Fernández S(1), Chain F(3),
Langella P(3), Beloin C(1), Ghigo JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Genetics of Biofilms Laboratory, Paris, France.
(2)Université de Paris, Ecole Doctorale Bio Sorbonne Paris Cite (BioSPC), Cellule
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(3)Commensals and Probiotics-Host Interactions Laboratory, Université
Paris-Saclay, INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(4)Institut Pasteur, Genetics of Biofilms Laboratory, Paris, France
jmghigo@pasteur.fr.
(#)Contributed equally

Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron is one of the most abundant gut symbiont species,
whose contribution to host health through its ability to degrade dietary
polysaccharides and mature the immune system is under intense scrutiny. In
contrast, adhesion and biofilm formation, which are potentially involved in gut
colonization and microbiota structure and stability, have hardly been
investigated in this intestinal bacterium. To uncover B. thetaiotaomicron
biofilm-related functions, we performed a transposon mutagenesis in the poorly
biofilm-forming reference strain VPI-5482 and showed that capsule 4, one of the
eight B. thetaiotaomicron capsules, hinders biofilm formation. We then showed
that the production of capsules 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 also inhibits biofilm formation
and that decreased capsulation of the population correlated with increased
biofilm formation, suggesting that capsules could be masking adhesive surface
structures. In contrast, we showed that capsule 8 displayed intrinsic adhesive
properties. Finally, we demonstrated that BT2934, the wzx homolog of the B.
thetaiotaomicron glycosylation locus, competes with capsule production and
impacts its adhesion capacity. This study therefore establishes B.
thetaiotaomicron capsule regulation as a major determinant of B. thetaiotaomicron
biofilm formation, providing new insights into how modulation of different B.
thetaiotaomicron surface structures affects in vitro biofilm formation.IMPORTANCE
The human gut harbors a complex bacterial community that plays important roles in
host health and disease, including nutrient acquisition, maturation of the immune
system, and resistance to infections. The capacity to adhere to surfaces and form
communities called biofilms is believed to be important for niche colonization
and maintenance of gut bacteria. However, little is known about the adhesion
capacity of most gut bacteria. In this study, we investigated biofilm formation
in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, one of the most abundant bacteria of the normal 
mammalian intestine. We identified that B. thetaiotaomicron capsules, a group of 
eight surface-exposed polysaccharidic layers mediating important interactions
with the gut environment, are also major determinants of biofilm formation that
mask or unmask adhesion factors. Studying how B. thetaiotaomicron regulates its
adhesion properties will allow us to better understand the physiology and
specific properties of this important gut symbiont within anaerobic biofilms.

Copyright © 2020 Béchon et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00729-20 
PMCID: PMC7315117
PMID: 32576670 

