
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 17;149:104506. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104506. [Epub 
ahead of print]

To resist and persist: Important factors in the pathogenesis of Bacteroides
fragilis.

Yekani M(1), Baghi HB(2), Naghili B(3), Vahed SZ(4), Sóki J(5), Memar MY(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kashan University of Medical 
Sciences, Kashan, Iran; Student Research Committee,Kashan University of Medical
Sciences, Kashan, Iran.
(2)Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Immunology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(3)Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Kidney Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Szeged,
Szeged, Hungary. Electronic address: soki.jozsef@med.u-szeged.hu.
(6)Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Microbiology Department, School of Medicine, Tabriz
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran; Students' Research Committee,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. Electronic address:
memarm@tbzmed.ac.ir.

Bacteroides fragilis is a most frequent anaerobic pathogen isolated from human
infections, particularly found in the abdominal cavity. Different factors
contribute to the pathogenesis and persistence of B. fragilis at infection sites.
The knowledge of the virulence factors can provide applicable information for
finding alternative options for the antibiotic therapy and treatment of B.
fragilis caused infections. Herein, a comprehensive review of the important B.
fragilis virulence factors was prepared. In addition to B. fragilis toxin (BFT)
and its potential role in the diarrhea and cancer development, some other
important virulence factors and characteristics of B. fragilis are described
including capsular polysaccharides, iron acquisition, resistance to antimicrobial
agents, and survival during the prolonged oxidative stress, quorum sensing, and
secretion systems.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104506 
PMID: 32950639 

