
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Sep 29. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14616. [Epub ahead of print]

A clostripain-like protease plays a major role in generating the secretome of
enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis.

Pierce JV(1)(2), Fellows JD(1), Anderson DE(3), Bernstein HD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Biochemistry Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.
(2)Prolacta Bioscience, 1800 Highland Avenue, Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.
(3)Advanced Mass Spectrometry Facility, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
20892, USA.

Bacteroides fragilis toxin (BFT) is a protein secreted by enterotoxigenic (ETBF) 
strains of B. fragilis. BFT is synthesized as a proprotein (proBFT) that is
predicted to be a lipoprotein and that is cleaved into two discrete fragments by 
a clostripain-like protease called fragipain (Fpn). In this study, we obtained
evidence that Fpn cleaves proBFT following its transport across the outer
membrane. Remarkably, we also found that the disruption of the fpn gene led to a 
strong reduction in the level of >100 other proteins, many of which are predicted
to be lipoproteins, in the culture medium of an ETBF strain. Experiments
performed with purified Fpn provided direct evidence that the protease releases
at least some of these proteins from the cell surface. The observation that
wild-type cells outcompeted an fpn- strain in co-cultivation assays also
supported the notion that Fpn plays an important role in cell physiology and is
not simply dedicated to toxin biogenesis. Finally, we found that purified Fpn
altered the adhesive properties of HT29 intestinal epithelial cells. Our results 
suggest that Fpn is a broad-spectrum protease that not only catalyzes protein
secretion on a wide scale but that also potentially cleaves host cell proteins
during colonization.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14616 
PMID: 32996200 

