
1. Cell Microbiol. 2020 Aug 22:e13252. doi: 10.1111/cmi.13252. [Epub ahead of print]

Bacteroides fragilis fucosidases facilitate growth and invasion of Campylobacter 
jejuni in the presence of mucins.

Luijkx YMCA(1)(2), Bleumink NMC(2), Jiang J(3)(4), Overkleeft HS(3), Wösten
MMSM(2), Strijbis K(2), Wennekes T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department Chemical Biology and Drug Discovery, Utrecht Institute for
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department Biomolecular Health Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(3)Leiden institute of Chemistry, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Health Science Center, School of Pharmacy, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen,
China.

The enteropathogenic bacterium, Campylobacter jejuni, was considered to be
non-saccharolytic, but recently it emerged that l-fucose plays a central role in 
C. jejuni virulence. Half of C. jejuni clinical isolates possess an operon for
l-fucose utilisation. In the intestinal tract, l-fucose is abundantly available
in mucin O-linked glycan structures, but C. jejuni lacks a fucosidase enzyme
essential to release the l-fucose. We set out to determine how C. jejuni can gain
access to these intestinal l-fucosides. Growth of the fuc + C. jejuni strains,
129,108 and NCTC 11168, increased in the presence of l-fucose while fucose
permease knockout strains did not benefit from additional l-fucose. With
fucosidase assays and an activity-based probe, we confirmed that Bacteriodes
fragilis, an abundant member of the intestinal microbiota, secretes active
fucosidases. In the presence of mucins, C. jejuni was dependent on B. fragilis
fucosidase activity for increased growth. Campylobacter jejuni invaded Caco-2
intestinal cells that express complex O-linked glycan structures that contain
l-fucose. In infection experiments, C. jejuni was more invasive in the presence
of B. fragilis and this increase is due to fucosidase activity. We conclude that 
C. jejuni fuc + strains are dependent on exogenous fucosidases for increased
growth and invasion.

© 2020 The Authors. Cellular Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.13252 
PMID: 32827216 

