
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Feb 18;11:184. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00184. eCollection
2020.

Goat Milk Consumption Enhances Innate and Adaptive Immunities and Alleviates
Allergen-Induced Airway Inflammation in Offspring Mice.

Kao HF(1), Wang YC(2), Tseng HY(2), Wu LS(3), Tsai HJ(4), Hsieh MH(5), Chen
PC(5), Kuo WS(2)(6), Liu LF(7), Liu ZG(8), Wang JY(2)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, National Tainan Junior College of Nursing, Tainan,
Taiwan.
(2)Center for Allergy and Clinical Immunology Research, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(4)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Institute of Population Health
Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan.
(5)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)School of Chemistry and Materials Science, Nanjing University of Information
Science and Technology, Nanjing, China.
(7)Institute of Gerontology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Respirology and Allergy, Third Affiliated Hospital of Shengzhen 
University, Shengzhen, China.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan,
Taiwan.

Goat milk (GM), as compared to cow milk (CM), is easier for humans to digest. It 
also has antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects and can improve minor
digestive disorders and prevent allergic diseases in infants. It is unclear
whether GM consumed in pregnant mothers has any protective effects on allergic
diseases in infants. In this experimental study with mice, we found GM feeding
enhanced immunoglobulin production, antigen-specific (ovalbumin, OVA) immune
responses, and phagocytosis activity. The GM-fed mice had an increasing
proportion of CD3+ T lymphocytes in the spleen. Splenocytes isolated from these
animals also showed significantly increased production of cytokines IFN-γ and
IL-10. More importantly, GM feeding during pregnancy and lactation periods can
confer protective activity onto offspring by alleviating the airway inflammation 
of allergic asthma induced by mite allergens. There was a remarkably different
composition of gut microbiota between offspring of pregnant mice fed with water
or with milk (GM or CM). There was a greater proportion of beneficial bacterial
species, such as Akkermansia muciniphila, Bacteroides eggerthii, and
Parabacteroides goldsteinii in the gut microbiota of offspring from GM- or CM-fed
pregnant mice compared to the offspring of water-fed pregnant mice. These results
suggested that improving the nutrition of pregnant mice can promote immunological
maturation and colonization of gut microbiota in offspring. This mother-to-child 
biological action may provide a protective effect on atopy development and
alleviate allergen-induced airway inflammation in offspring.

Copyright © 2020 Kao, Wang, Tseng, Wu, Tsai, Hsieh, Chen, Kuo, Liu, Liu and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.00184 
PMCID: PMC7040033
PMID: 32132998 

