
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 28. pii: AEM.01569-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01569-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium Temporally Modulates the Enteric
Microbiota and Host Responses to Overcome Colonization Resistance in Swine.

Bescucci DM(1)(2), Moote PE(1)(2), Ortega Polo R(1), Uwiera RRE(3), Inglis GD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lethbridge Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada Douglas.Inglis@canada.ca
Richard.Uwiera@ualberta.ca.
(4)Lethbridge Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
Lethbridge, Alberta, Canada Douglas.Inglis@canada.ca Richard.Uwiera@ualberta.ca.

Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is a prevalent incitant of enteritis in
human beings and animals. It has been proposed that host defense responses
incited by Salmonella allow the bacterium to overcome colonization resistance.
Piglets (n=24) were orally inoculated with S. enterica Typhimurium DT104 or
buffer alone, and the host and microbial responses were temporally examined at
acute (2 days post-inoculation [dpi]), subacute (6 dpi), and recovery (10 dpi)
stages of salmonellosis. At the acute stage of disease, body temperatures were
elevated, and feed consumption and weight gain were reduced. Densities of
Salmonella associated with gut mucosa decreased over time, with higher densities 
of the bacterium in the ileum and the large intestine. Moreover, substantive
histopathologic changes were observed as a function of time, with prominent
epithelial injury and neutrophil infiltration observed at 2 dpi. Correspondingly,
a variety of host metrics were temporally affected in piglets with salmonellosis 
(e.g. TNFα, IFNγ, PR39, βD2, iNOS, IL8, REGIIIγ). The enteric microbiota was
characterized using culture-independent and -dependent methods in concert, and
taxon- and location-specific changes to the microbiota were observed in infected 
piglets. Bacteroides spp. (e.g. B. uniformis, B. fragilis), Streptococcus spp.
(e.g. S. gallolyticus), and various Gammaproteobacteria were highly associated
with inflamed tissues, while bacteria within Ruminococcaceae and Veillonellaceae 
were mainly associated with healthy mucosa. In conclusion, the study findings
showed that S. Typhimurium incited temporal and spatial modifications to the
swine autochthonous microbiota, and to host defense responses, that were
consistent with overcoming colonization resistance to incite salmonellosis in
swine.IMPORTANCE Limited information is available on host and enteric microbiota 
responses incited by Salmonella enterica Typhimurium in swine, and possible
mechanisms by which the bacterium overcomes colonization resistance to incite
salmonellosis. Temporal characterization of a variety of host metrics in piglets 
(e.g. physiologic, histopathologic, and immunologic) showed the importance of
studying the progression of salmonellosis. A number of host responses integrally 
associated with disease development were identified. Utilization of
next-generation sequence analysis to characterize the enteric microbiota was
found to lack sufficient resolution; however, culture-dependent and -independent 
methods in combination identified taxon- and location-specific changes to
bacterial communities in infected piglets. The study identified bacteria and host
responses associated with salmonellosis, which will be beneficial in
understanding colonization resistance and for the development of effective
alternatives to antibiotics to mitigate salmonellosis.

© Crown copyright 2020.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01569-20 
PMID: 32859592 

