
1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 5;14(12):e0226111. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226111.
eCollection 2019.

Sharing of gut microbial strains between selected individual sets of twins
cohabitating for decades.

Koo H(1), Hakim JA(2), Crossman DK(1), Lefkowitz EJ(3), Morrow CD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Heflin Center for Genomic Science, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama, United States of America.
(4)Department of Cell, Developmental and Integrative Biology, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Given the increasing realization of the important functions of the
gut microbial community in human health, it is important to determine whether the
increased age of the host coupled with inevitable environmental changes can alter
the stability of individual microbial strains of the gut microbial community.
Since early studies demonstrated that pairs of twins possess the related gut
microbial communities, to gain insights into the temporal stability of the
reservoir of gut microbial strains in humans, we have assessed the strain
relatedness of samples from two previously published data sets that were obtained
from twin children and adults (36-80 years old) who have been either living
together or apart for different times.
METHODS: We analyzed the two data sets; twin children (n = 24) and adults (n =
50) using our previously developed strain-tracking program called Window-based
Single Nucleotide Variant (SNV) Similarity (WSS) that can distinguish a related
strain pair from a non-related strain pair based on the overall genome-wide SNV
similarity. To independently substantiate the identification of distinct
microbial genomic variants (herein strains) observed from WSS analysis, we used
analysis by StrainPhlAn.
RESULTS: Analysis of the twin children data set revealed a significantly (P-value
<0.05) higher number of the shared strain pairs with a predominance of
Bacteroides vulgatus between individual sets of twin pairs than the twin adult
data set. Additional analysis on the adult twins showed that twins who have been 
living apart less than 10 years shared significantly more related strain pairs
than twins living apart between 10 to 60 years. Eighty-year-old twins who had
been living together for 79 years then separated for 1 year showed the highest
number of related strain pairs consisting of B. vulgatus, Eubacterium eligens,
and Bifidobacterium adolescentis. The next highest number of related strain pairs
was found in 56-year-old twins who had been living together for 51 years then
separated for 5 years (B. vulgatus and Coprococcus eutactus as related strains), 
73-year-old twins living together for 66 years and then separated for 7 years
(Bacteroides uniformis and Clostrium sp. L2-50 as related strains) and
36-year-old twins separated for 19 years (shared strains of Alistipes shahii and 
E. eligens). Finally, a sporadic appearance of a single shared strain that did
not show a correlation with time of separation was observed in three twin sets
that had separation times between 22 to 54 years.
CONCLUSION: We conclude from our strain-tracking analysis of twins that certain
gut microbial strains can be shared between individuals in some cases for
decades. Changes in the host environmental conditions over time can impact the
stability landscape of the gut microbial community resulting in the appearance of
new strains that could potentially impact microbe interactions that are essential
for function in human health.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226111 
PMCID: PMC6894816
PMID: 31805145  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

