
1. Exp Eye Res. 2020 Feb;191:107921. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2020.107921. Epub 2020 Jan 
7.

Gut microbiota compositional profile and serum metabolic phenotype in patients
with primary open-angle glaucoma.

Gong H(1), Zhang S(2), Li Q(3), Zuo C(2), Gao X(2), Zheng B(2), Lin M(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China; Department of Ophthalmology, Guangdong Provincial
Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene
Regulation, Sun Yat-sen Memorial hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: linmk@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

The gut microbiota (GM) and its influence on host metabolism are considered to be
an environmental factor that contributes to the progression of many immune and
neurodegenerative diseases. However, the features of the GM and serum metabolites
in Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) patients have not been clearly elucidated. 
The purpose of this research is to explore the gut microbial composition and
serum metabolic phenotype in POAG patients. 16S rRNA V4 genes of bacteria from
the fecal samples of 30 POAG patients and 30 healthy subjects were sequenced by
the Illumina MiSeq platform and then analyzed by QIIME. Their serum samples were 
analyzed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC-MS)-based metabolomics. The 
association between gut microbial species and host circulating metabolites and
clinical phenotypes was also analyzed. Compared with controls, f Prevotellaceae, 
g unidentified Enterobacteriaceae, and s Escherichia coli increased the most in
POAG patients, whereas g Megamonas and s Bacteroides plebeius significantly
decreased in POAG patients. The alteration of the endogenous metabolomic profile 
in POAG patients included five amino acids or dipeptides, two hormone derivates, 
one purine derivative, one bile acid derivative and one organic acid. It also
showed that citric acid was positively correlated with Megamonas, whereas
L-γ-Glutamyl-L-alanine, MHPG, cholic acid glucuronide and hypoxanthine were
negatively correlated with Megamonas. Mean visual acuity was negatively
correlated with Blautia, mean VF-MD was negatively correlated with
Faecalibacterium, and average RNFL thickness was positively correlated with
Streptococcus. Our results revealed that there was a distinct difference in GM
composition and serum metabolic phenotype between POAG patients and healthy
individuals. This finding suggests the potential correlations between the GM and 
serum metabolites in the pathogenesis of glaucoma and thus provides new insight
into the GM-targeted interventions of this disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2020.107921 
PMID: 31917963  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors
claimed there were no conflicts of interest.

