
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Oct 1;86(20). pii: e01651-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01651-20. Print 2020 Oct 1.

Sharing a β-Glucan Meal: Transcriptomic Eavesdropping on a Bacteroides
ovatus-Subdoligranulum variabile-Hungatella hathewayi Consortium.

Centanni M(1), Sims IM(2), Bell TJ(2), Biswas A(1), Tannock GW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(2)The Ferrier Research Institute, Victoria University of Wellington, Petone, New
Zealand.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand gerald.tannock@otago.ac.nz.

Whole-transcriptome analysis was used to investigate the molecular interplay
between three bacterial species that are members of the human gut microbiota.
Bacteroides ovatus, Subdoligranulum variabile, and Hungatella hathewayi formed
associations in cocultures fed barley β-glucan, a constituent of dietary fiber.
B. ovatus depolymerized β-glucan and released, but did not utilize,
3-O-β-cellobiosyl-d-glucose (DP3) and 3-O-β-cellotriosyl-d-glucose (DP4). These
oligosaccharides provided growth substrates for S. variabile and H. hathewayi
with a preference for DP4 in the case of the latter species. There was increased 
transcription of a B. ovatus mixed-linkage-β-glucan utilization locus, as well as
carbohydrate transporters in S. variabile and H. hathewayi when in batch
coculture. Increased transcription of the β-glucan utilization locus did not
occur in continuous culture. Evidence for interactions relating to provision of
cobalamin, alterations to signaling, and modulation of the "stringent response"
(an adaptation to nutrient deprivation) were detected. Overall, we established a 
bacterial consortium based on barley β-glucan in vitro, which can be used to
investigate aspects of the functional blueprint of the human gut
microbiota.IMPORTANCE The microbial community, mostly composed of bacterial
species, residing in the human gut degrades and ferments polysaccharides derived 
from plants (dietary fiber) that would not otherwise be digested. In this way,
the collective metabolic actions of community members extract additional energy
from the human diet. While the variety of bacteria present in the microbial
community is well known, the formation of bacterial consortia, and the consequent
interactions that result in the digestion of dietary polysaccharides, has not
been studied extensively. The importance of our work was the establishment, under
laboratory conditions, of a consortium of gut bacteria that formed around a
dietary constituent commonly present in cereals. This enabled the metabolic
interplay between the bacterial species to be studied. This kind of knowledge is 
required to construct an interactive, metabolic blueprint of the microbial
community that inhabits the human gut.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01651-20 
PMID: 32801182 

