
1. Genome Med. 2020 May 29;12(1):50. doi: 10.1186/s13073-020-00747-0.

Strain-resolved microbiome sequencing reveals mobile elements that drive
bacterial competition on a clinical timescale.

Zlitni S(1)(2), Bishara A(1)(3), Moss EL(1)(2), Tkachenko E(1)(2), Kang JB(4),
Culver RN(1), Andermann TM(5), Weng Z(6), Wood C(7), Handy C(7), Ji HP(7),
Batzoglou S(3), Bhatt AS(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Stanford University, 269
Campus Drive, MC5156, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
USA.
(7)Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(8)Departments of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
asbhatt@stanford.edu.
(9)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Stanford University, 269
Campus Drive, MC5156, Stanford, CA, 94305, USA. asbhatt@stanford.edu.

BACKGROUND: Populations of closely related microbial strains can be
simultaneously present in bacterial communities such as the human gut microbiome.
We recently developed a de novo genome assembly approach that uses read cloud
sequencing to provide more complete microbial genome drafts, enabling precise
differentiation and tracking of strain-level dynamics across metagenomic samples.
In this case study, we present a proof-of-concept using read cloud sequencing to 
describe bacterial strain diversity in the gut microbiome of one hematopoietic
cell transplantation patient over a 2-month time course and highlight temporal
strain variation of gut microbes during therapy. The treatment was accompanied by
diet changes and administration of multiple immunosuppressants and
antimicrobials.
METHODS: We conducted short-read and read cloud metagenomic sequencing of DNA
extracted from four longitudinal stool samples collected during the course of
treatment of one hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) patient. After applying
read cloud metagenomic assembly to discover strain-level sequence variants in
these complex microbiome samples, we performed metatranscriptomic analysis to
investigate differential expression of antibiotic resistance genes. Finally, we
validated predictions from the genomic and metatranscriptomic findings through in
vitro antibiotic susceptibility testing and whole genome sequencing of isolates
derived from the patient stool samples.
RESULTS: During the 56-day longitudinal time course that was studied, the
patient's microbiome was profoundly disrupted and eventually dominated by
Bacteroides caccae. Comparative analysis of B. caccae genomes obtained using read
cloud sequencing together with metagenomic RNA sequencing allowed us to identify 
differences in substrain populations over time. Based on this, we predicted that 
particular mobile element integrations likely resulted in increased antibiotic
resistance, which we further supported using in vitro antibiotic susceptibility
testing.
CONCLUSIONS: We find read cloud assembly to be useful in identifying key
structural genomic strain variants within a metagenomic sample. These strains
have fluctuating relative abundance over relatively short time periods in human
microbiomes. We also find specific structural genomic variations that are
associated with increased antibiotic resistance over the course of clinical
treatment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-020-00747-0 
PMCID: PMC7260799
PMID: 32471482 

