
1. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Sep 14. doi: 10.4014/jmb.2006.06034. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Zerumbone restores gut microbiota composition in ETBF colonized AOM/DSS mice.

Cho HW(1), Rhee KJ(2), Eom YB(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, College of Medical Sciences, Soonchunhyang
University, Asan 31538, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Health Sciences,
Yonsei University at Wonju, Wonju, 26493, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan 31538, Republic of Korea.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cause of common malignant neoplasm
worldwide. Many studies have analyzed compositions of gut microbiota associated
with various diseases such as inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) and colon cancer.
One of the most representative bacteria involved in CRC is enterotoxigenic
Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF), a species belonging to phylum Bacteroidetes. We used
ETBF colonized mice with azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran sulphate sodium (DSS) and
zerumbone, a compound with anti-bacterial effect, to determine whether zerumbone 
could restore intestinal microbiota composition. Four experimental groups of mice
were used: sham, ETBF colonized AOM/DSS group, ETBF colonized AOM/DSS group
zerumbone 60 mg kg-1 (ETBF/AOM/DSS + Z (60)), and only zerumbone (60 mg
kg-1)-treated group. We performed reversible dye terminators-based analysis of
16S rRNA gene region V3-V4 for group comparison. Microbiota compositions of
ETBF/AOM/DSS + Z (60) group and ETBF colonized AOM/DSS group not given zerumbone 
were significantly different. There were more Bacteroides in ETBF/AOM/DSS + Z
(60) group than those in ETBF colonized AOM/DSS group, suggesting that B.
fragilis could be a normal flora activated by zerumbone. In addition, based on
linear discriminant analysis of effect size (LEfSe) analysis, microbial diversity
decreased significantly in the ETBF colonized AOM/DSS group. However, after given
zerumbone, the taxonomic relative abundance was increased. These findings suggest
that zerumbone not only influenced the microbial diversity and richness, but also
could be helpful for enhancing the balance of gut microbial composition. In this 
work, we demonstrate that zerumbone could restore the composition of intestinal
microbiota.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.2006.06034 
PMID: 32958727 

