
1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2020 Sep 1. pii: gfaa172. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa122.
[Epub ahead of print]

Metagenomic profiling of gut microbiome in early chronic kidney disease.

Sato N(1)(2), Kakuta M(3), Hasegawa T(4), Yamaguchi R(3), Uchino E(2)(5),
Murashita K(6), Nakaji S(7), Imoto S(3)(4), Yanagita M(2), Okuno Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Data Intelligence, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Health Intelligence Center, The Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Intelligent Systems, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)COI Research Initiatives Organization, Hirosaki University, Aomori, Japan.
(7)Department of Social Medicine, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, Aomori, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The relationship between chronic kidney disease (CKD) and the gut
microbiome, which interact through chronic inflammation, uraemic toxin production
and immune response regulation, has gained interest in the development of CKD
therapies. However, reports using shotgun metagenomic analysis of the gut
microbiome are scarce, especially for early CKD. Here we characterized gut
microbiome differences between non-CKD participants and ones with early CKD using
metagenomic sequencing.
METHODS: In total, 74 non-CKD participants and 37 participants with early CKD
were included based on propensity score matching, controlling for various factors
including dietary intake. Stool samples were collected from participants and
subjected to shotgun sequencing. Bacterial and pathway abundances were profiled
at the species level with MetaPhlAn2 and HUMAnN2, respectively, and overall
microbiome differences were determined using Bray-Curtis dissimilarities.
Diabetic and non-diabetic populations were analysed separately.
RESULTS: For diabetic and non-diabetic participants, the mean estimated
glomerular filtration rates of the CKD group were 53.71 [standard deviation (SD) 
3.87] and 53.72 (SD 4.44), whereas those of the non-CKD group were 72.63 (SD
7.72) and 76.10 (SD 9.84), respectively. Alpha and beta diversities were not
significantly different between groups. Based on taxonomic analysis,
butyrate-producing species Roseburia inulinivorans, Ruminococcus torques and
Ruminococcus lactaris were more abundant in the non-CKD group, whereas
Bacteroides caccae and Bacteroides coprocora were more abundant in the
non-diabetic CKD group.
CONCLUSIONS: Although gut microbiome changes in individuals with early CKD were
subtle, the results suggest that changes related to producing short-chain fatty
acids can already be observed in early CKD.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfaa122 
PMID: 32869063 

