
1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2020 Mar;29(3):287-297. doi:
10.1007/s00787-019-01352-2. Epub 2019 May 22.

Gut microbiota and dietary patterns in children with
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Wang LJ(1)(2), Yang CY(3)(4), Chou WJ(1), Lee MJ(1), Chou MC(1), Kuo HC(5)(6),
Yeh YM(7)(8), Lee SY(9)(10), Huang LH(11), Li SC(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology/Molecular Medicine Research Center, 
Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Colon and Rectal Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou,
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Kawasaki Disease Center, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.
(7)Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Genomic Medicine Research Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital,
Linkou, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Psychiatry, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.
(10)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(11)Genomics and Proteomics Core Laboratory, Department of Medical Research,
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, No.123, Ta-Pei Road, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan.
(12)Genomics and Proteomics Core Laboratory, Department of Medical Research,
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of
Medicine, No.123, Ta-Pei Road, Kaohsiung City, Taiwan. raymond.pinus@gmail.com.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common neurodevelopmental
disorder, but the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of ADHD remain
unclear. Gut microbiota has been recognized to influence brain function and
behaviors. Therefore, this study aimed to determine whether imbalanced gut
microbiomes identified by a 16S rRNA sequencing approach are involved in the
pathophysiology of ADHD. We recruited a total of 30 children with ADHD (mean age:
8.4 years) and a total of 30 healthy controls (mean age: 9.3 years) for this
study. The dietary patterns of all participants were assessed with the food
frequency questionnaire. The microbiota of fecal samples were investigated using 
16S rRNA V3V4 amplicon sequencing, followed by bioinformatics and statistical
analyses. We found that the gut microbiota communities in ADHD patients showed a 
significantly higher Shannon index and Chao index than the control subjects.
Furthermore, the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis was
used to identify differentially enriched bacteria between ADHD patients and
healthy controls. The relative abundance of Bacteroides coprocola (B. coprocola) 
was decreased, while the relative abundance of Bacteroides uniformis (B.
uniformis), Bacteroides ovatus (B. ovatus), and Sutterella stercoricanis (S.
stercoricanis) were increased in the ADHD group. Of all participants, S.
stercoricanis demonstrated a significant association with the intake of dairy,
nuts/seeds/legumes, ferritin and magnesium. B. ovatus and S. stercoricanis were
positively correlated to ADHD symptoms. In conclusion, we suggest that the gut
microbiome community is associated with dietary patterns, and linked to the
susceptibility to ADHD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-019-01352-2 
PMID: 31119393  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

