
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Aug;64:102232. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102232. Epub 2020 Jul 
4.

Lactoferrin and lactoferricin B reduce adhesion and biofilm formation in the
intestinal symbionts Bacteroides fragilis and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron.

de Sá Almeida JS(1), de Oliveira Marre AT(2), Teixeira FL(1), Boente RF(2),
Domingues RMCP(2), de Paula GR(3), Lobo LA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology Department, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro - UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Department
of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Fluminense Federal University,
Brazil.
(2)Medical Microbiology Department, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro - UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Fluminense
Federal University, Brazil.
(4)Medical Microbiology Department, Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro - UFRJ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic
address: lobol@micro.ufrj.br.

Several factors affect the composition of species that inhabit our intestinal
tract, including mode of delivery, genetics and nutrition. Antimicrobial peptides
and proteins secreted in the gastrointestinal tract are powerful tools against
bacteria. Lactoferrin (LF) inhibits the growth of several bacterial species, such
as Enterobacteriaceae, but may stimulate probiotic bacteria. Activity of LF
against gut symbiotic species of the Bacteroides genus could give us insights on 
how these species colonize the gut. We investigated the effects of the
antimicrobial protein lactoferrin and its derived peptide, lactoferricin B on two
species of strict anaerobes, opportunistic pathogens that cause diseases in both 
adults and children, commonly found in the microbiota of the human
gastrointestinal tract, Bacteroides fragilis and B. thetaiotaomicron., In vitro
biofilm formation and binding to laminin were strongly inhibited by a low
concentration of lactoferrin (12.5 μg/ml). Conversely, the growth of the strains 
in a micro-dilution assay in minimal media with different iron sources was not
affected by physiological concentrations (2 mg/ml) of apo-lactoferrin or
holo-lactoferrin. The combination of lactoferrin with antibiotics in synergism
assays was also negative. The lactoferricin B fragment was also unable to inhibit
growth in a similar test with concentrations of up to 32 μg/ml. Resistance to
lactoferrin could confer an advantage to these species, even when high amount of 
this protein is present in the gastrointestinal tract. However, colonization is
hampered by the binding and biofilm inhibitiory effect of lactoferrin, which may 
explain the low prevalence of Bacteroides in healthy babies. Resistance to this
antimicrobial protein may help understand the success of these opportunistic
pathogens during infection in the peritoneum.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102232 
PMID: 32634470 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interests.

