
1. Theranostics. 2020 Apr 6;10(12):5398-5411. doi: 10.7150/thno.41725. eCollection
2020.

Integrative metagenomic and metabolomic analyses reveal severity-specific
signatures of gut microbiota in chronic kidney disease.

Wu IW(1)(2), Gao SS(3), Chou HC(3), Yang HY(2)(4)(5), Chang LC(6), Kuo YL(7),
Dinh MCV(8), Chung WH(9), Yang CW(2)(4), Lai HC(10)(11)(12), Hsieh WP(3), Su
SC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.
(2)College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Statistics, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(4)Kidney Research Center, Department of Nephrology, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Linkuo, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, US.
(6)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Florida, US.
(7)Biotools, Co., Ltd, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, Florida, US.
(9)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, and Microbiota
Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(11)Central Research Laboratory, XiaMen Chang Gung Hospital, XiaMen, China.
(12)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial hospital, Linkuo,
Taiwan.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a serious healthcare dilemma, associated with
specific changes in gut microbiota and circulating metabolome. Yet, the
functional capacity of CKD microbiome and its intricate relationship with the
host metabolism at different stages of disease are less understood.METHODS: Here,
shotgun sequencing of fecal samples and targeted metabolomics profiling of serum 
bile acids, short- and medium-chain fatty acids, and uremic solutes were
performed in a cohort of CKD patients with different severities and non-CKD
controls.
RESULTS: We identified that levels of 13 microbial species and 6 circulating
metabolites were significantly altered across early to advanced stages or only in
particular stage(s). Among these, Prevotella sp. 885 (decreased) was associated
with urea excretion, while caproic acid (decreased) and p-cresyl sulfate
(elevated) were positively and negatively correlated with the glomerular
filtration rate, respectively. In addition, we identified gut microbial species
linked to changes in circulating metabolites. Microbial genes related to
secondary bile acid biosynthesis were differentially abundant at the early stage,
while pathway modules related to lipid metabolism and lipopolysaccharide
biosynthesis were enriched in the CKD microbiome at the advanced stage,
suggesting that changes in microbial metabolism and host inflammation may
contribute to renal health. Further, we identified metagenomic and metabolomic
markers to discriminate cases of different severities from the controls, among
which Bacteroides eggerthii individually was of particular value in early
diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our dual-omics data reveal the connections between intestinal
microbes and circulating metabolites perturbed in CKD, which may be of
etiological and diagnostic importance.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.41725 
PMCID: PMC7196299
PMID: 32373220 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.

