
1. Food Funct. 2020 Aug 1;11(8):6971-6986. doi: 10.1039/d0fo01282c. Epub 2020 Jul
22.

Fubrick tea attenuates high-fat diet induced fat deposition and metabolic
disorder by regulating gut microbiota and caffeine metabolism.

Jing N (1), Liu X , Jin M , Yang X , Hu X , Li C , Zhao K .

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Engineering Laboratory for Food Green Processing and Safety Control,
and Shaanxi Key Laboratory for Hazard Factors Assessment in Processing and
Storage of Agricultural Products, College of Food Engineering and Nutritional
Science, Shaanxi Normal University, Xi'an 710119, PR China. kzhao@snnu.edu.cn.

Fubrick tea aqueous extract (FTEs) has been reported to improve lipid metabolism 
and gut microbiota communities in mice and humans. However, it is still unclear
how FTEs prevents obesity through gut microbiota, and whether some other
regulatory mechanisms are involved in the process. Here, we found that FTEs
supplementation effectively alleviated the body weight gain, visceral fat
accumulation, dyslipidemia, and impaired glucose tolerance induced by a high-fat 
diet (HFD), and fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from FTEs-treated mice
showed similar protective effects as FTEs supplementation in mice fed with a HFD.
The results confirmed that gut microbiota played key roles in attenuating
HFD-induced fat deposition and metabolic disorder. In particular, FTEs reversed
HFD-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis via increasing the relative abundances of
Bacteroides, Adlercreutzia, Alistipes, Parabacteroides, and
norank_f_Lachnospiraceae, and reducing that of Staphylococcus. Interestingly,
FTEs could still alleviate HFD-induced lipid accumulation in mice treated with
antibiotics, which had increased relative abundances of Bacteroidetes,
Bacteroides, and Bacteroides_uniformis sp. In addition, supplementation with FTEs
also modified the serum metabolome, especially the "caffeine metabolism" pathway.
Furthermore, FTEs supplementation increased the concentrations of caffeine,
theophylline, and theobromine in serum, which were positively correlated with an 
abundance of norank_f_Lachnospiraceae. Overall, FTEs exerts beneficial effects
against obesity induced by HFD, and the underlying mechanism is partially related
to the reprogramming of intestinal microbiota, while the metabolism of caffeine
in FTEs also played an important role in the process. This study provides a
theoretical basis for the further study of the anti-obesity effects of FTEs and
the consideration of gut microbiota as a potential target for the treatment of
obesity induced by a HFD.

DOI: 10.1039/d0fo01282c 
PMID: 32697259 

