
1. Liver Int. 2020 Mar;40(3):622-637. doi: 10.1111/liv.14316. Epub 2019 Dec 30.

Coordinated changes of gut microbiome and lipidome differentiates nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH) from isolated steatosis.

Qian M(1), Hu H(2), Yao Y(3), Zhao D(1), Wang S(4), Pan C(1), Duan X(1), Gao
Y(1), Liu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang S(5), Qi LW(4), Wang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine and Clinical Pharmacy, State Key Laboratory of
Natural Medicines, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)School of life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University,
Nanjing, China.
(3)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing,
China.
(4)Clinical Metabolomics Center, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Department of Hepatology, Beijing Ditan Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Chaoyang District, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease encompasses isolated
steatosis or nonalcoholic fatty liver and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
NASH develops from isolated steatosis with obscure driving forces. We aim to
identify key factors promoting this transition.
METHODS: Following 21-week of high-fat diet feeding, obese mice were classified
into two groups termed as isolated steatosis and NASH based on hematoxylin-eosin 
staining of liver histology. The integrated multi-omics analysis of lipidome,
transcriptome and gut microbiome were performed in mice with isolated steatosis
and NASH, and confirmed in human samples.
RESULTS: Livers in mice with NASH lost most lipids, and the transcriptional
landscape was also changed dramatically in mice with NASH in relative to mice
with isolated steatosis. Plasma lipidome analysis demonstrated a very clear
difference between these two groups of mice, which was partially recapitulated in
serum of patients with isolated steatosis and NASH. The microbiota composition
revealed that Bacteroides genus and Bacteroides uniformis species decreased while
Mucispirillum genus and Mucispirillum schaedleri species increased largely in
mice with NASH. More importantly, we found that Bacteroides uniformis correlated 
positively with triglycerides (TGs) and negatively with free fatty acids (FFAs)
and PE(18:1/20:4), while Mucispirillum schaedleri correlated positively with
FFAs, LysoPC(20:3), LysoPC(20:4) and DG(16:1/18:2). Mechanically, administration 
of Bacteroides uniformis increased specific TGs, and decreased hepatic injury and
inflammation in diet-induced mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, through multi-omics integration, we identified a
microbiota-lipid axis promoting the initiation of NASH from isolated steatosis,
which might provide a novel perspective on NASH pathogenesis and treatment.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.14316 
PMID: 31782595 

