
1. World J Gastroenterol. 2020 Feb 14;26(6):614-626. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v26.i6.614.

Characterizing the composition of intestinal microflora by 16S rRNA gene
sequencing.

Wang WJ(1), Zhou YL(1), He J(1), Feng ZQ(1), Zhang L(1), Lai XB(1), Zhou JX(1),
Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Digestive Disease Center, Guangzhou 
First People's Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510030, 
Guangdong Province, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Guangzhou Digestive Disease Center, Guangzhou 
First People's Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510030, 
Guangdong Province, China. wong.hong@163.com.

BACKGROUND: This study determined the composition and diversity of intestinal
microflora in patients with colorectal adenoma (CRA), which may provide
precedence for investigating the role of intestinal microflora in the
pathogenesis of colorectal tumors, the composition of intestinal microflora
closely related to CRA, and further validating the possibility of intestinal
flora as a biomarker of CRA.
AIM: To study the relationship between intestinal microflora and CRA.
METHODS: This is a prospective control case study from October 2014 to June 2015 
involving healthy volunteers and patients with advanced CRA. High-throughput
sequencing and bioinformatics analysis were used to investigate the composition
and diversity of intestinal microflora in 36 healthy subjects and 49 patients
with advanced CRA. Endpoints measured were operational taxonomic units of
intestinal flora, as well as their abundance and diversity (α and β types).
RESULTS: In this study, the age, gender, body mass index, as well as location
between controls and patients had no significant differences. The
mucosa-associated gut microbiota diversity and bacterial distribution in healthy 
controls and colorectal adenomas were similar. The operational taxonomic unit,
abundance, and α and β diversity were all reduced in patients with CRA compared
to controls. At the phylum level, the composition of intestinal microflora was
comparable between patients and controls, but the abundance of Proteobacteria was
increased, and Firmicutes and Bacteroides were significantly decreased (P <
0.05). The increase in Halomonadaceae and Shewanella algae, and reduction in
Coprococcus and Bacteroides ovatus, could serve as biomarkers of CRA.
High-throughput sequencing confirms the special characteristics and diversity of 
intestinal microflora in healthy controls and patients with CRA.
CONCLUSION: The diversity of intestinal microflora was decreased in patients with
CRA. An increase in Halomonadaceae and Shewanella algae are markers of CRA.

©The Author(s) 2020. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v26.i6.614 
PMCID: PMC7029349
PMID: 32103871 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: The authors have 
no conflict of interest to declare.

