
1. Microbiome. 2020 Sep 11;8(1):130. doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00906-w.

Multi-omics analysis reveals the influence of genetic and environmental risk
factors on developing gut microbiota in infants at risk of celiac disease.

Leonard MM(1)(2)(3)(4), Karathia H(5), Pujolassos M(6), Troisi J(6)(7)(8),
Valitutti F(8)(9), Subramanian P(5), Camhi S(2)(4), Kenyon V(2)(4), Colucci
A(6)(7), Serena G(1)(2)(3)(4), Cucchiara S(10), Montuori M(10), Malamisura B(11),
Francavilla R(12), Elli L(13), Fanelli B(5), Colwell R(5)(14), Hasan N(5),
Zomorrodi AR(15)(16)(17)(18), Fasano A(19)(20)(21)(22)(23); CD-GEMM Team.

Collaborators: Piemontese P, Calvi A, Baldassarre M, Norsa L, Trovato CM, Raguseo
CL, Passaro T, Roggero P, Crocco M, Morelli A, Perrone M, Chieppa M, Scala G,
Lionetti ME, Catassi C, Serretiello A, Vecchi C, de Villsante GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, MassGeneral Hospital for
Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Mucosal Immunology and Biology Research Center, MassGeneral Hospital for
Children, Boston, USA.
(3)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Celiac Research Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)CosmosID Inc., Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Theoreo srl, University of Salerno, Montecorvino Pugliano, Italy.
(7)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, Scuola Medica Salernitana,
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.
(8)European Biomedical Research Institute of Salerno (EBRIS), Via S. De Renzi,
50, 84125, Salerno, Italy.
(9)Pediatric Unit, Maternal and Child Health Department, AOU San Giovanni di Dio 
e Ruggi d'Aragona, Salerno, Italy.
(10)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(11)Pediatric Unit, Maternal and Child Health Department, AOU San Giovanni di Dio
e Ruggi d'Aragona, Pole of Cava de' Tirreni, Salerno, Italy.
(12)Pediatric Gastroenterology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(13)Center for Prevention and Diagnosis of Celiac Disease Fondazione IRCCS Ca'
Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(14)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland, 
College Park, MD, USA.
(15)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, MassGeneral Hospital
for Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
azomorrodi@mgh.harvard.edu.
(16)Mucosal Immunology and Biology Research Center, MassGeneral Hospital for
Children, Boston, USA. azomorrodi@mgh.harvard.edu.
(17)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. azomorrodi@mgh.harvard.edu.
(18)Celiac Research Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
azomorrodi@mgh.harvard.edu.
(19)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, MassGeneral Hospital
for Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. afasano@mgh.harvard.edu.
(20)Mucosal Immunology and Biology Research Center, MassGeneral Hospital for
Children, Boston, USA. afasano@mgh.harvard.edu.
(21)Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. afasano@mgh.harvard.edu.
(22)Celiac Research Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
afasano@mgh.harvard.edu.
(23)European Biomedical Research Institute of Salerno (EBRIS), Via S. De Renzi,
50, 84125, Salerno, Italy. afasano@mgh.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is an autoimmune digestive disorder that occurs
in genetically susceptible individuals in response to ingesting gluten, a protein
found in wheat, rye, and barley. Research shows that genetic predisposition and
exposure to gluten are necessary but not sufficient to trigger the development of
CD. This suggests that exposure to other environmental stimuli early in life,
e.g., cesarean section delivery and exposure to antibiotics or formula feeding,
may also play a key role in CD pathogenesis through yet unknown mechanisms. Here,
we use multi-omics analysis to investigate how genetic and early environmental
risk factors alter the development of the gut microbiota in infants at risk of
CD.
RESULTS: Toward this end, we selected 31 infants from a large-scale prospective
birth cohort study of infants with a first-degree relative with CD. We then
performed rigorous multivariate association, cross-sectional, and longitudinal
analyses using metagenomic and metabolomic data collected at birth, 3 months and 
6 months of age to explore the impact of genetic predisposition and environmental
risk factors on the gut microbiota composition, function, and metabolome prior to
the introduction of trigger (gluten). These analyses revealed several microbial
species, functional pathways, and metabolites that are associated with each
genetic and environmental risk factor or that are differentially abundant between
environmentally exposed and non-exposed infants or between time points. Among our
significant findings, we found that cesarean section delivery is associated with 
a decreased abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus and Bacteroides dorei and of folate
biosynthesis pathway and with an increased abundance of hydroxyphenylacetic acid,
alterations that are implicated in immune system dysfunction and inflammatory
conditions. Additionally, longitudinal analysis revealed that, in infants not
exposed to any environmental risk factor, the abundances of Bacteroides uniformis
and of metabolite 3-3-hydroxyphenylproprionic acid increase over time, while
those for lipoic acid and methane metabolism pathways decrease, patterns that are
linked to beneficial immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study provides unprecedented insights into major
taxonomic and functional shifts in the developing gut microbiota of infants at
risk of CD linking genetic and environmental risk factors to detrimental
immunomodulatory and inflammatory effects. Video Abstract.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-020-00906-w 
PMCID: PMC7488762
PMID: 32917289 

