
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 11;15(8):e0237357. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237357.
eCollection 2020.

Effects of fermented feeds and ginseng polysaccharides on the intestinal
morphology and microbiota composition of Xuefeng black-bone chicken.

Xie Y(1), Liu J(1), Wang H(1), Luo J(1), Chen T(1), Xi Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Sun
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal
Nutrition Control, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Fermented feeds contain abundant organic acids, amino acids, and small peptides, 
which improve the nutritional status as well as the morphology and microbiota
composition of the intestine. Ginseng polysaccharides exhibit several biological 
activities and contribute to improving intestinal development. Here, Xuefeng
black-bone chickens were fed a basal diet fermented by Bacillus subtilis,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Lactobacillus plantarum, and Enterococcus faecium, with
or without ginseng polysaccharides. The 100% microbially fermented feed (Fe) and 
100% microbially fermented feed and ginseng polysaccharide (FP) groups showed
significantly increased villus height and villus height to crypt depth ratio, and
decreased crypt depth in the jejunum. In the 100% complete feed and ginseng
polysaccharide (Po) group, the villus height to crypt depth ratio was
significantly increased, crypt depth was reduced, and villus height remained
unaffected. Next, we studied the intestinal microbial composition of 32 Xuefeng
black-bone chickens. A total of 10 phyla and 442 genera were identified, among
which Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla.
At the genus level, Sutterella and Asteroleplasma abundance increased and
decreased, respectively, in the FP and Po groups. Sutterella abundance was
positively correlated to villus height and villus height to crypt depth ratio,
and negatively correlated to crypt depth, and Asteroleplasma abundance was
positively correlated to crypt depth and negatively correlated to villus height
to crypt depth ratio. At the species level, the FP group showed significantly
increased Bacteroides_vulgatus and Eubacterium_tortuosum and decreased
Mycoplasma_gallinarum and Asteroleplasma_anaerobium abundance, and the Po group
showed significantly increased Mycoplasma_gallinarum and
Asteroleplasma_anaerobium abundance. Moreover, bacterial abundance was closely
related to the jejunum histomorphology. Asteroleplasma_anaerobium abundance was
positively correlated with crypt depth and negatively correlated with villus
height to crypt depth ratio. Mycoplasma_gallinarum abundance was positively
correlated to villus height, and Bacteroides_vulgatus and Eubacterium_tortuosum
abundance was positively correlated with villus height to crypt depth ratio and
negatively correlated with crypt depth. Therefore, fermented feeds with ginseng
polysaccharides may be used as effective alternatives to antibiotics for
improving intestinal morphology and microbial composition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237357 
PMCID: PMC7418966
PMID: 32780763 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

