
1. Microbiome. 2020 Mar 5;8(1):28. doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00811-2.

Predictable modulation of cancer treatment outcomes by the gut microbiota.

Heshiki Y(1)(2), Vazquez-Uribe R(3), Li J(4)(5), Ni Y(2), Quainoo S(3), Imamovic 
L(3), Li J(6)(7), Sørensen M(3), Chow BKC(8), Weiss GJ(9), Xu A(10)(11), Sommer
MOA(12), Panagiotou G(13)(14)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology & Bioinformatics Unit, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product
Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany.
(2)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Group, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of 
Denmark, 2800 Kgs., Lyngby, Denmark.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases and Public Health, The Jockey Club College
of Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong
Kong, China.
(7)School of Data Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(9)University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
drglenweiss@outlook.com.
(10)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. amxu@hku.hk.
(11)Department of Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. amxu@hku.hk.
(12)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of
Denmark, 2800 Kgs., Lyngby, Denmark. msom@bio.dtu.dk.
(13)Systems Biology & Bioinformatics Unit, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product 
Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany.
Gianni.Panagiotou@hki-jena.de.
(14)Systems Biology and Bioinformatics Group, School of Biological Sciences,
Faculty of Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
Gianni.Panagiotou@hki-jena.de.
(15)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Gianni.Panagiotou@hki-jena.de.

The gut microbiota has the potential to influence the efficacy of cancer therapy.
Here, we investigated the contribution of the intestinal microbiome on treatment 
outcomes in a heterogeneous cohort that included multiple cancer types to
identify microbes with a global impact on immune response. Human gut metagenomic 
analysis revealed that responder patients had significantly higher microbial
diversity and different microbiota compositions compared to non-responders. A
machine-learning model was developed and validated in an independent cohort to
predict treatment outcomes based on gut microbiota composition and functional
repertoires of responders and non-responders. Specific species, Bacteroides
ovatus and Bacteroides xylanisolvens, were positively correlated with treatment
outcomes. Oral gavage of these responder bacteria significantly increased the
efficacy of erlotinib and induced the expression of CXCL9 and IFN-γ in a murine
lung cancer model. These data suggest a predictable impact of specific
constituents of the microbiota on tumor growth and cancer treatment outcomes with
implications for both prognosis and therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-020-00811-2 
PMCID: PMC7059390
PMID: 32138779 

