
1. Front Immunol. 2019 Nov 8;10:2623. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02623. eCollection
2019.

Human Islet Response to Selected Type 1 Diabetes-Associated Bacteria: A
Transcriptome-Based Study.

Abdellatif AM(1)(2)(3), Jensen Smith H(4)(5), Harms RZ(1)(2), Sarvetnick
NE(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery-Transplant, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE, United States.
(2)Mary and Dick Holland Regenerative Medicine Program, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt.
(4)Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE, United States.
(5)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE, United States.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a chronic autoimmune disease that results from
destruction of pancreatic β-cells. T1D subjects were recently shown to harbor
distinct intestinal microbiome profiles. Based on these findings, the role of gut
bacteria in T1D is being intensively investigated. The mechanism connecting
intestinal microbial homeostasis with the development of T1D is unknown. Specific
gut bacteria such as Bacteroides dorei (BD) and Ruminococcus gnavus (RG) show
markedly increased abundance prior to the development of autoimmunity. One
hypothesis is that these bacteria might traverse the damaged gut barrier, and
their constituents elicit a response from human islets that causes metabolic
abnormalities and inflammation. We have tested this hypothesis by exposing human 
islets to BD and RG in vitro, after which RNA-Seq analysis was performed. The
bacteria altered expression of many islet genes. The commonly upregulated genes
by these bacteria were cytokines, chemokines and enzymes, suggesting a
significant effect of gut bacteria on islet antimicrobial and biosynthetic
pathways. Additionally, each bacteria displayed a unique set of differentially
expressed genes (DEGs). Ingenuity pathway analysis of DEGs revealed that top
activated pathways and diseases included TREM1 signaling and inflammatory
response, illustrating the ability of bacteria to induce islet inflammation. The 
increased levels of selected factors were confirmed using immunoblotting and
ELISA methods. Our data demonstrate that islets produce a complex anti-bacterial 
response. The response includes both symbiotic and pathogenic aspects. Both
oxidative damage and leukocyte recruitment factors were prominent, which could
induce beta cell damage and subsequent autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2019 Abdellatif, Jensen Smith, Harms and Sarvetnick.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.02623 
PMCID: PMC6857727
PMID: 31781116 

