
1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2020 Sep 1;105(9). pii: dgaa407. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgaa407.

Gut Microbiota in T1DM-Onset Pediatric Patients: Machine-Learning Algorithms to
Classify Microorganisms as Disease Linked.

Biassoni R(1), Di Marco E(1), Squillario M(2), Barla A(2), Piccolo G(3), Ugolotti
E(1), Gatti C(1), Minuto N(3), Patti G(4)(5), Maghnie M(3)(4)(5), d'Annunzio
G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostics, Analysis Laboratory, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini,
Genoa, Italy.
(2)DIBRIS University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)Pediatric Clinic Regional Center for Pediatric Diabetes, IRCCS Istituto
Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health, University Of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.

AIMS: The purpose of this work is to find the gut microbial fingerprinting of
pediatric patients with type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: The microbiome of 31 children with type 1 diabetes at onset and of 25
healthy children was determined using multiple polymorphic regions of the 16S
ribosomal RNA. We performed machine-learning analyses and metagenome functional
analysis to identify significant taxa and their metabolic pathways content.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, patients showed a significantly higher
relative abundance of the following most important taxa: Bacteroides stercoris,
Bacteroides fragilis, Bacteroides intestinalis, Bifidobacterium bifidum,
Gammaproteobacteria and its descendants, Holdemania, and Synergistetes and its
descendants. On the contrary, the relative abundance of Bacteroides vulgatus,
Deltaproteobacteria and its descendants, Parasutterella and the Lactobacillus,
Turicibacter genera were significantly lower in patients with respect to healthy 
controls. The predicted metabolic pathway more associated with type 1 diabetes
patients concerns "carbon metabolism," sugar and iron metabolisms in particular. 
Among the clinical variables considered, standardized body mass index,
anti-insulin autoantibodies, glycemia, hemoglobin A1c, Tanner stage, and age at
onset emerged as most significant positively or negatively correlated with
specific clusters of taxa.
CONCLUSIONS: The relative abundance and supervised analyses confirmed the
importance of B stercoris in type 1 diabetes patients at onset and showed a
relevant role of Synergistetes and its descendants in patients with respect to
healthy controls. In general the robustness and coherence of the showed results
underline the relevance of studying the microbioma using multiple polymorphic
regions, different types of analysis, and different approaches within each
analysis.

© Endocrine Society 2020. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgaa407 
PMID: 32692360 

