
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jun 23;11:1335. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01335. eCollection 
2020.

Breast-Milk Microbiota Linked to Celiac Disease Development in Children: A Pilot 
Study From the PreventCD Cohort.

Benítez-Páez A(1), Olivares M(1), Szajewska H(2), Pieścik-Lech M(2), Polanco
I(3), Castillejo G(4), Nuñez M(4), Ribes-Koninckx C(5), Korponay-Szabó IR(6),
Koletzko S(7)(8), Meijer CR(9), Mearin ML(9), Sanz Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology, Nutrition and Health Research Unit, Institute of
Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council, Valencia,
Spain.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, La Paz University
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Gluten-Associated Disorder Unit, Institut d'Investigació Sanitària Pere
Virgili, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Spain.
(5)Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, La Fe University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Celiac Disease Center, Heim Pál Children's Hospital, Budapest, Hungary.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, University
Hospital of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, School of Medicine Collegium Medicum, University of
Warmia and Mazury, Olsztyn, Poland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
Netherlands.

Celiac disease (CeD) is an immune-mediated disorder triggered by exposure to
dietary gluten proteins in genetically predisposed individuals. In addition to
the host genome, the microbiome has recently been linked to CeD risk and
pathogenesis. To progress in our understanding of the role of breast milk
microbiota profiles in CeD, we have analyzed samples from a sub-set of mothers (n
= 49) included in the PreventCD project, whose children did or did not develop
CeD. The results of the microbiota data analysis indicated that neither the BMI, 
HLA-DQ genotype, the CeD condition nor the gluten-free diet of the mothers could 
explain the human milk microbiota profiles. Nevertheless, we found that origin
country, the offspring's birth date and, consequently, the milk sampling date
influenced the abundance and prevalence of microbes in human milk, undergoing a
transition from an anaerobic to a more aerobic microbiota, including potential
pathogenic species. Furthermore, certain microbial species were more abundant in 
milk samples from mothers whose children went on to develop CeD compared to those
that remained healthy. These included increases in facultative methylotrophs such
as Methylobacterium komagatae and Methylocapsa palsarum as well as in species
such as Bacteroides vulgatus, that consumes fucosylated-oligosaccharides present 
in human milk, and other breast-abscess associated species. Theoretically, these 
microbiota components could be vertically transmitted from mothers-to-infants
during breastfeeding, thereby influencing CeD risk.

Copyright © 2020 Benítez-Páez, Olivares, Szajewska, Pieścik-Lech, Polanco,
Castillejo, Nuñez, Ribes-Koninckx, Korponay-Szabó, Koletzko, Meijer, Mearin and
Sanz.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01335 
PMCID: PMC7324710
PMID: 32655529 

