
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Nov 14;20(1):862. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-6251-7.

Changes of intestinal bacterial microbiota in coronary heart disease complicated 
with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Zhang Y(1)(2), Xu J(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2), Ren X(1)(2), Liu Y(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking University People's Hospital, No.11
Xizhimen South Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Clinical Center of Immune-Mediated Digestive Diseases, Peking University
People's Hospital, No.11 Xizhimen South Street, Xicheng, Beijing, People's
Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology & Central Laboratory, Peking
University People's Hospital, No.11 Xizhimen South Street, Xicheng District,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking University People's Hospital, No.11
Xizhimen South Street, Xicheng District, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
liuyulan@pkuph.edu.cn.
(5)Clinical Center of Immune-Mediated Digestive Diseases, Peking University
People's Hospital, No.11 Xizhimen South Street, Xicheng, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. liuyulan@pkuph.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Previous study reported that patients who suffered coronary heart
disease (CHD) complicated with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) had
worse cardiac function and clinical outcomes than patients with CHD only.
Notably, the mechanism is still unclear. This study aimed to investigate the
changes and roles of intestinal bacterial microbiota in CHD-NAFLD patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: People were recruited and divided into three groups,
including CHD patients (without NAFLD), CHD-NAFLD patients and healthy controls
(HCs). Each group contained 24 people. Fecal samples and clinical information
were carefully collected. The Illumina sequencing of 16S rRNA was applied to
profile the overall structure of the fecal bacterial microbiota and the
characteristics of the bacterial microbiota based on the Operational Taxonomic
Units. In clinical information, the CHD-NAFLD patients showed an increase in BMI,
uric acid and triglyceride. There was a significant reduction in the abundance of
Parabacteroides and Collinsella in overall CHD patients (including CHD-NAFLD and 
CHD patients). The intestinal bacterial microbiota in CHD-NAFLD patients showed
an increase in the abundance of Copococcus and Veillonella, and a reduction in
the abundance of Parabacteroides, Bacteroides fragilis, Ruminococcus gnavus,
Bacteroides dorei, and Bifidobacterium longum subsp infantis. Among them, the
abundance of Ruminococcus gnavus and Bacteroides dorei was significantly lower
than that in CHD patients. Additionally, BMI positively correlated with the
abundance of Copococcus and negatively correlated with the abundance of
Bifidobacterium longum subsp infantis. The abundance of Veillonella positively
correlated with AST. The abundance of Bacteroides dorei negatively correlated
with ALT and AST. It indicates that the abundance of intestinal microbiota was
related to the changes in clinical indexes.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes of intestinal bacterial microbiota in CHD-NAFLD patients may
be important factors affecting the degree of metabolic disorder, which may be one
of the important reasons for the worse clinical outcome and disease progression
in CHD-NAFLD patients than in CHD patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6251-7 
PMCID: PMC6857132
PMID: 31726978  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

