
1. Comput Struct Biotechnol J. 2020 Mar 13;18:631-641. doi:
10.1016/j.csbj.2020.03.003. eCollection 2020.

The landscape of bacterial presence in tumor and adjacent normal tissue across 9 
major cancer types using TCGA exome sequencing.

Rodriguez RM(1)(2), Hernandez BY(3)(2), Menor M(1), Deng Y(1), Khadka VS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Core, Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, John A. Burns
School of Medicine, University of Hawaii Mānoa, Honolulu, HI, United States.
(2)Population Sciences in the Pacific Program-Cancer Epidemiology, University of 
Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI, United States.
(3)Epidemiology, University of Hawaii Cancer Center, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, HI, United States.

Identification of microbial composition directly from tumor tissue permits
studying the relationship between microbial changes and cancer pathogenesis. We
interrogated bacterial presence in tumor and adjacent normal tissue strictly in
pairs utilizing human whole exome sequencing to generate microbial profiles.
Profiles were generated for 813 cases from stomach, liver, colon, rectal, lung,
head & neck, cervical and bladder TCGA cohorts. Core microbiota examination
revealed twelve taxa to be common across the nine cancer types at all
classification levels. Paired analyses demonstrated significant differences in
bacterial shifts between tumor and adjacent normal tissue across stomach, colon, 
lung squamous cell, and head & neck cohorts, whereas little or no differences
were evident in liver, rectal, lung adenocarcinoma, cervical and bladder cancer
cohorts in adjusted models. Helicobacter pylori in stomach and Bacteroides
vulgatus in colon were found to be significantly higher in adjacent normal
compared to tumor tissue after false discovery rate correction. Computational
results were validated with tissue from an independent population by
species-specific qPCR showing similar patterns of co-occurrence among
Fusobacterium nucleatum and Selenomonas sputigena in gastric samples. This study 
demonstrates the ability to identify bacteria differential composition derived
from human tissue whole exome sequences. Taken together our results suggest the
microbial profiles shift with advanced disease and that the microbial composition
of the adjacent tissue can be indicative of cancer stage disease progression.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2020.03.003 
PMCID: PMC7109368
PMID: 32257046 

