
1. mBio. 2020 Apr 7;11(2). pii: e00095-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00095-20.

Synergy between Cell Surface Glycosidases and Glycan-Binding Proteins Dictates
the Utilization of Specific Beta(1,3)-Glucans by Human Gut Bacteroides.

Déjean G(#)(1), Tamura K(#)(1)(2), Cabrera A(1), Jain N(1)(3), Pudlo NA(4),
Pereira G(4), Viborg AH(1), Van Petegem F(2), Martens EC(4), Brumer
H(5)(2)(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada brumer@msl.ubc.ca.
(6)Department of Botany, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

The human gut microbiota (HGM) has far-reaching impacts on human health and
nutrition, which are fueled primarily by the metabolism of otherwise indigestible
complex carbohydrates commonly known as dietary fiber. However, the molecular
basis of the ability of individual taxa of the HGM to address specific dietary
glycan structures remains largely unclear. In particular, the utilization of
β(1,3)-glucans, which are widespread in the human diet as yeast, seaweed, and
plant cell walls, had not previously been resolved. Through a systems-based
approach, here we show that the symbiont Bacteroides uniformis deploys a single, 
exemplar polysaccharide utilization locus (PUL) to access yeast β(1,3)-glucan,
brown seaweed β(1,3)-glucan (laminarin), and cereal mixed-linkage
β(1,3)/β(1,4)-glucan. Combined biochemical, enzymatic, and structural analysis of
PUL-encoded glycoside hydrolases (GHs) and surface glycan-binding proteins
(SGBPs) illuminates a concerted molecular system by which B. uniformis recognizes
and saccharifies these distinct β-glucans. Strikingly, the functional
characterization of homologous β(1,3)-glucan utilization loci (1,3GUL) in other
Bacteroides further demonstrated that the ability of individual taxa to utilize
β(1,3)-glucan variants and/or β(1,3)/β(1,4)-glucans arises combinatorially from
the individual specificities of SGBPs and GHs at the cell surface, which feed
corresponding signals to periplasmic hybrid two-component sensors (HTCSs) via
TonB-dependent transporters (TBDTs). These data reveal the importance of
cooperativity in the adaptive evolution of GH and SGBP cohorts to address
individual polysaccharide structures. We anticipate that this fine-grained
knowledge of PUL function will inform metabolic network analysis and proactive
manipulation of the HGM. Indeed, a survey of 2,441 public human metagenomes
revealed the international, yet individual-specific, distribution of each
1,3GUL.IMPORTANCE Bacteroidetes are a dominant phylum of the human gut microbiota
(HGM) that target otherwise indigestible dietary fiber with an arsenal of
polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs), each of which is dedicated to the
utilization of a specific complex carbohydrate. Here, we provide novel insight
into this paradigm through functional characterization of homologous PULs from
three autochthonous Bacteroides species, which target the family of dietary
β(1,3)-glucans. Through detailed biochemical and protein structural analysis, we 
observed an unexpected diversity in the substrate specificity of PUL glycosidases
and glycan-binding proteins with regard to β(1,3)-glucan linkage and branching
patterns. In combination, these individual enzyme and protein specificities
support taxon-specific growth on individual β(1,3)-glucans. This detailed
metabolic insight, together with a comprehensive survey of individual 1,3GULs
across human populations, further expands the fundamental roadmap of the HGM,
with potential application to the future development of microbial intervention
therapies.

Copyright © 2020 Déjean et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00095-20 
PMCID: PMC7157763
PMID: 32265336 

