
1. Mol Metab. 2020 Sep 8:101076. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101076. [Epub ahead of
print]

Infusion of donor feces affects the gut-brain axis in humans with metabolic
syndrome.

Hartstra AV(1), Schüppel V(2), Imangaliyev S(1), Schrantee A(3), Prodan A(1),
Collard D(1), Levin E(1), Dallinga-Thie G(1), Ackermans MT(4), Winkelmeijer M(1),
Havik SR(1), Metwaly A(2), Lagkouvardos I(5), Nier A(6), Bergheim I(6),
Heikenwalder M(7), Dunkel A(8), Nederveen AJ(3), Liebisch G(9), Mancano G(10),
Claus SP(10), Benítez-Páez A(11), la Fleur SE(4), Bergman JJ(12), Gerdes V(1),
Sanz Y(11), Booij J(3), Kemper E(13), Groen AK(1), Serlie MJ(14), Haller D(15),
Nieuwdorp M(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal and Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Chair of Nutrition and Immunology, Technical University of Munich, Freising,
Germany.
(3)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Laboratory of Endocrinology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location
AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(5)ZIEL-Institute for Food and Health, Technical University of Munich, Freising, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Molecular Nutritional Science, University 
of Vienna, Austria.
(7)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of Chronic Inflammation and
Cancer, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Leibniz-Institute for Food Systems Biology, Technical University of Munich,
Freising, Germany.
(9)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.
(10)Department of Food and Nutritional Sciences, University of Reading, Reading, 
United Kingdom.
(11)Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spanish National Research
Council (IATA-CSIC), Valencia, Spain.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Amsterdam University Medical Centers,
location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(15)Chair of Nutrition and Immunology, Technical University of Munich, Freising, 
Germany; ZIEL-Institute for Food and Health, Technical University of Munich,
Freising, Germany.
(16)Department of Internal and Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical
Centers, location AMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
m.nieuwdorp@amsterdamumc.nl.

OBJECTIVES: Increasing evidence indicates that intestinal microbiota play a role 
in diverse metabolic processes via intestinal butyrate production. Human
bariatric surgery data suggest that the gut-brain axis is also involved in this
process, but the underlying mechanisms remain unknown.
DESIGN: We compared the effect of fecal microbiota transfer (FMT) from
post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) donors vs oral butyrate supplementation on
(123I-FP-CIT-determined) brain dopamine transporter (DAT) and serotonin
transporter (SERT) binding as well as stable isotope-determined insulin
sensitivity at baseline and after 4 weeks in 24 male and female treatment-naïve
metabolic syndrome subjects. Plasma metabolites and fecal microbiota were also
determined at these time points.
RESULTS: We observed an increase in brain DAT after donor FMT compared to oral
butyrate that reduced this binding. However, no effect on body weight and insulin
sensitivity was demonstrated after post-RYGB donor feces transfer in humans with 
metabolic syndrome. Increases in fecal levels of Bacteroides uniformis were
significantly associated with an increase in DAT, whereas increases in Prevotella
spp. showed an inverse association. Changes in the plasma metabolites glycine,
betaine, methionine, and lysine (associated with the S-adenosylmethionine cycle) 
were also associated with altered striatal DAT expression.
CONCLUSION: Although more and larger studies are needed, our data suggest a
potential gut microbiota-driven modulation of brain dopamine and serotonin
transporters in human subjects with obese metabolic syndrome. These data also
suggest the presence of a gut-brain axis in humans that can be modulated.
NTR REGISTRATION: 4488.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmet.2020.101076 
PMID: 32916306 

