
1. Exp Gerontol. 2019 Nov;127:110722. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2019.110722. Epub 2019
Sep 4.

Muscle strength is increased in mice that are colonized with microbiota from
high-functioning older adults.

Fielding RA(1), Reeves AR(2), Jasuja R(3), Liu C(4), Barrett BB(5), Lustgarten
MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory, Tufts University,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Roger.Fielding@Tufts.edu.
(2)Obesity Metabolism Laboratory at the Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research 
Center (HNRCA), Tufts University, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address:
Andrew.Reeves@Tufts.edu.
(3)Research Program in Men's Health: Aging and Metabolism, Boston Claude D.
Pepper Older Americans Independence Center, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: rjasuja@partners.org.
(4)Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory, Tufts University,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Christine.Liu@bmc.org.
(5)Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory, Tufts University,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Brittany.Barrett@Tufts.edu.
(6)Nutrition, Exercise Physiology, and Sarcopenia Laboratory, Tufts University,
Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: Michael.Lustgarten@Tufts.edu.

Evidence in support of a gut-muscle axis has been reported in rodents, but
studies in older adult humans are limited. Accordingly, the primary goals of the 
present study were to compare gut microbiome composition in older adults that
differed in terms of the percentage of whole body lean mass and physical
functioning (high-functioning, HF, n = 18; low-functioning, LF, n = 11), and to
evaluate the causative role of the gut microbiome on these variables by
transferring fecal samples from older adults into germ-free mice. Family-level
Prevotellaceae, genus-level Prevotella and Barnesiella, and the bacterial species
Barnesiella intestinihominis were higher in HF older adults at the initial study 
visit, at a 1-month follow-up visit, in HF human fecal donors, and in
HF-colonized mice, when compared with their LF counterparts. Grip strength was
significantly increased by 6.4% in HF-, when compared with LF-colonized mice. In 
contrast, despite significant differences for the percentage of whole body lean
mass and physical functioning when comparing the human fecal donors, the
percentage of whole body lean mass and treadmill endurance capacity were not
different when comparing human microbiome-containing mice. In sum, these data
suggest a role for gut bacteria on the maintenance of muscle strength, but argue 
against a role for gut bacteria on the maintenance of the percentage of whole
body lean mass or endurance capacity, findings that collectively add to
elucidation of the gut-muscle axis in older adults.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2019.110722 
PMCID: PMC6823114
PMID: 31493521  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

