
1. J Vet Intern Med. 2020 Jan;34(1):145-159. doi: 10.1111/jvim.15675. Epub 2019 Dec 
31.

Detection of Bartonella spp. in dogs after infection with Rickettsia rickettsii.

Lashnits E(1), Neupane P(2), Maggi RG(2)(3), Linder KE(4), Bradley JM(2),
Balakrishnan N(3), Southern BL(5), McKeon GP(2)(5), Chandrashekar R(6),
Breitschwerdt EB(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(3)Intracellular Pathogens Research Laboratory, Comparative Medicine Institute,
College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina.
(4)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(5)Laboratory Animal Resources, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(6)IDEXX Laboratories, Inc, Westbrook, Maine.

BACKGROUND: Dynamics of infection by Bartonella and Rickettsia species, which are
epidemiologically associated in dogs, have not been explored in a controlled
setting.
OBJECTIVES: Describe an outbreak investigation of occult Bartonella spp.
infection among a group of dogs, discovered after experimentally induced
Rickettsia rickettsii (Rr) infection.
ANIMALS: Six apparently healthy purpose-bred Beagles obtained from a commercial
vendor.
METHODS: Retrospective and prospective study. Dogs were serially tested for
Bartonella spp. and Rr using serology, culture, and PCR, over 3 study phases:
3 months before inoculation with Rr (retrospective), 6 weeks after inoculation
with Rr (retrospective), and 8 months of follow-up (prospective).
RESULTS: Before Rr infection, 1 dog was Bartonella henselae (Bh)
immunofluorescent antibody assay (IFA) seroreactive and 1 was Rickettsia spp. IFA
seroreactive. After inoculation with Rr, all dogs developed mild Rocky Mountain
spotted fever compatible with low-dose Rr infection, seroconverted to Rickettsia 
spp. within 4-11 days, and recovered within 1 week. When 1 dog developed ear tip 
vasculitis with intra-lesional Bh, an investigation of Bartonella spp. infection 
was undertaken. All dogs had seroconverted to 1-3 Bartonella spp. between 7 and
18 days after Rr inoculation. Between 4 and 8 months after Rr inoculation, Bh DNA
was amplified from multiple tissues from 2 dogs, and Bartonella vinsonii subsp.
berkhoffii (Bvb) DNA was amplified from 4 of 5 dogs' oral swabs.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Vector-borne disease exposure was
demonstrated in research dogs from a commercial vendor. Despite limitations, our 
results support the possibilities of recrudescence of chronic subclinical
Bartonella spp. infection after Rr infection and horizontal direct-contact
transmission between dogs.

© 2019 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published by Wiley
Periodicals, Inc. on behalf of the American College of Veterinary Internal
Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.15675 
PMCID: PMC6979086
PMID: 31891215 

