
1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Aug 12. pii: S2352-345X(20)30126-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2020.08.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Human-Derived Bifidobacterium dentium Modulates the Mammalian Serotonergic System
and Gut-Brain Axis.

Engevik MA(1), Luck B(1), Visuthranukul C(2), Ihekweazu FD(3), Engevik AC(4), Shi
Z(1), Danhof HA(5), Chang-Graham A(5), Hall A(6), Endres BT(7), Haidacher SJ(1), 
Horvath TD(1), Haag AM(1), Devaraj S(1), Garey KW(7), Britton RA(5), Hyser JM(5),
Shroyer NF(8), Versalovic J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas; Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas; Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas;
Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Nutrition STAR, Faculty of Medicine,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Texas Children's
Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(4)Department of Surgical Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville Tennessee.
(5)Department of Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas; Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas;
Department of Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas.
(7)Department of Pharmacy Practice and Translational Research, University of
Houston College of Pharmacy, Houston, Texas.
(8)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(9)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas; Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
Electronic address: jamesv@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The human gut microbiota can regulate production of serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) from enterochromaffin cells. However, the mechanisms
underlying microbial-induced serotonin signaling are not well understood.
METHODS: Adult germ-free mice were treated with sterile media, live
Bifidobacterium dentium, heat-killed B dentium, or live Bacteroides ovatus. Mouse
and human enteroids were used to assess the effects of B dentium metabolites on
5-HT release from enterochromaffin cells. In vitro and in vivo short-chain fatty 
acids and 5-HT levels were assessed by mass spectrometry. Expression of
tryptophan hydroxylase, short-chain fatty acid receptor free fatty acid receptor 
2, 5-HT receptors, and the 5-HT re-uptake transporter (serotonin transporter)
were assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and immunostaining. RNA
in situ hybridization assessed 5-HT-receptor expression in the brain, and
5-HT-receptor-dependent behavior was evaluated using the marble burying test.
RESULTS: B dentium mono-associated mice showed increased fecal acetate. This
finding corresponded with increased intestinal 5-HT concentrations and increased 
expression of 5-HT receptors 2a, 4, and serotonin transporter. Application of
acetate and B dentium-secreted products stimulated 5-HT release in mouse and
human enteroids. In situ hybridization of brain tissue also showed significantly 
increased hippocampal expression of 5-HT-receptor 2a in B dentium-treated mice
relative to germ-free controls. Functionally, B dentium colonization normalized
species-typical repetitive and anxiety-like behaviors previously shown to be
linked to 5-HT-receptor 2a.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that B dentium, and the bacterial metabolite
acetate, are capable of regulating key components of the serotonergic system in
multiple host tissues, and are associated with a functional change in adult
behavior.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2020.08.002 
PMID: 32795610 

