
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 22;11:1642. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01642. eCollection 
2020.

The Butyrogenic and Lactic Bacteria of the Gut Microbiota Determine the Outcome
of Allogenic Hematopoietic Cell Transplant.

Devaux CA(1)(2), Million M(1), Raoult D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Univ, IRD, APHM, MEPHI, IHU-Méditerranée Infection, Marseille,
France.
(2)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Marseille, France.

Graft versus host disease (GVHD) is a post-transplant pathology in which
donor-derived T cells present in the Peyer's patches target the cell-surface
alloantigens of the recipient, causing host tissue damages. Therefore, the GVHD
has long been considered only a purely immunological process whose prevention
requires an immunosuppressive treatment. However, since the early 2010s, the
impact of gut microbiota on GVHD has received increased attention. Both a
surprising fall in gut microbiota diversity and a shift toward Enterobacteriaceae
were described in this disease. Recently, unexpected results were reported that
further link GVHD with changes in bacterial composition in the gut and disruption
of intestinal epithelial tight junctions leading to abnormal intestinal barrier
permeability. Patients receiving allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplant
(allo-HCT) as treatment of hematologic malignancies showed a decrease of the
overall diversity of the gut microbiota that affects Clostridia and Blautia spp. 
and a predominance of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) of the Enterococcus genus, in
particular the lactose auxotroph Enterococcus faecium. The reduced microbiota
diversity (likely including Actinobacteria, such as Bifidobacterium adolescentis 
that cross feed butyrogenic bacteria) deprives the butyrogenic bacteria (such as 
Roseburia intestinalis or Eubacterium) of their capacity to metabolize acetate to
butyrate. Indeed, administration of butyrate protects against the GVHD. Here, we 
review the data highlighting the possible link between GVHD and lactase defect,
accumulation of lactose in the gut lumen, reduction of Reg3 antimicrobial
peptides, narrower enzyme equipment of bacteria that predominate post-transplant,
proliferation of En. faecium that use lactose as metabolic fuels, induction of
innate and adaptive immune response against these bacteria which maintains an
inflammatory process, elevated expression of myosin light chain kinase 210
(MLCK210) and subsequent disruption of intestinal barrier, and translocation of
microbial products (lactate) or transmigration of LAB within the liver. The
analysis of data from the literature confirms that the gut microbiota plays a
major role in the GVHD. Moreover, the most recent publications uncover that the
LAB, butyrogenic bacteria and bacterial cross feeding were the missing pieces in 
the puzzle. This opens new bacteria-based strategies in the treatment of GVHD.

Copyright © 2020 Devaux, Million and Raoult.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01642 
PMCID: PMC7387665
PMID: 32793150 

