
1. Gut Pathog. 2020 Sep 10;12:43. doi: 10.1186/s13099-020-00381-6. eCollection 2020.

Mechanisms and microbial influences on CTLA-4 and PD-1-based immunotherapy in the
treatment of cancer: a narrative review.

Miller PL(1), Carson TL(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Preventive Medicine, University of Alabama
Birmingham School of Medicine, 1717 11th Ave S, Birmingham, AL 35205 USA.

Background: The relationship between gastrointestinal (GI) bacteria and the
response to anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in the treatment of cancer
can potentially be enhanced to allow patients to maximally respond to these
treatments. Insight into the complex interaction between gut microbiota and the
human adaptive immune system will help guide future immunotherapeutic cancer
treatments to allow a more robust clinical response and fewer adverse effects in 
patients requiring these drugs. This review highlights these interactions as well
as the potential for the creation of "oncomicrobiotics" that would selectively
tailor one's GI bacteria to maximally respond to anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1
treatments will fewer adverse effects.
Main body: CTLA-4 is an antigen on the surface of T cells which, upon
stimulation, leads to inhibition of activated T cells to terminate the immune
response. However, many types of tumor cells can upregulate CTLA-4 in the tumor
microenvironment, allowing these cells to evade targeting and destruction by the 
body's immune system by prematurely inhibiting T cells. Increased representation 
of Bacteroides fragilis, Burkholderia cepacia and the Faecalibacterium genus in
the GI tract of patients receiving CTLA-4-based immunotherapy led to a stronger
therapeutic effect while minimizing adverse side effects such as colitis. In
addition, by introducing bacteria involved in vitamin B and polyamine transport
to the GI tracts of patients treated with anti-CTLA-4 drugs led to increased
resistance to colitis while maintaining therapeutic efficacy. PD-1 is another
molecule upregulated in many tumor microenvironments which acts in a similar
manner to CTLA-4 to tone down the anti-neoplastic actions of T cells. Antibodies 
to PD-1 have shown promise to help allow the body's natural immune response to
appropriately target and destroy tumor cells. The presence of Bifidobacterium
breve and longum, Akkermansia muciniphila and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in the
GI tracts of cancer patients has the potential to create a more robust immune
response to anti-PD-1 drugs and prolonged survival. The development of
"oncomicrobiotics" has the potential to help tailor one's gut microbiota to allow
patients to maximally respond to immunotherapy without sacrificing increases in
toxicity. These oncomicrobiotics may possibly include antibiotics, probiotics,
postbiotics and/or prebiotics. However, many challenges lie ahead in the creation
of oncomicrobiotics.
Conclusion: The creation of oncomicrobiotics may allow many patients receiving
anti-CTLA-4 and PD-1 immunotherapy to experience prolonged survival and a better 
quality of life.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s13099-020-00381-6 
PMCID: PMC7488430
PMID: 32944086 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare they have 
no competing interests.

