
1. Iran J Med Sci. 2020 Jul;45(4):269-276. doi: 10.30476/ijms.2019.45772.

The Effect of Bifidobacterium Bifidum Supernatant and Cell Mass on the
Proliferation Potential of Rat Bone Marrow-Derived Stromal Cells.

Saberian M(1), Shahidi Delshad E(2), Habibi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Nutrition, School of Nutritional Sciences
and Dietetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences. Tehran, Iran.
(2)Shahid Rajaei Cardiovascular Research Center, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Genetics, Breast Cancer Research Center, Motamed Cancer
Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

Background: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are widely used to treat various
diseases, however, their proliferative potential reduces after a number of
passages. It has been shown that some probiotics such as Bifidobacterium Bifidum 
(B. bifidum) affect the proliferation of various cell lineages. The present study
aimed to investigate the effect of B. bifidum on the proliferation of rat bone
marrow stromal cells (rBMSCs) and to develop a method for compensating their
proliferation reduction after some passages.
Methods: The present experimental study was conducted at Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, in 2017. The stromal cells were isolated from
rBMSCs and their mesenchymal properties were confirmed by osteogenic and
adipogenic differentiation media and staining. B. bifidum was cultured and the B.
bifidum supernatant (BS) and bacterial cell mass (BCM) were extracted. The rBMSCs
were treated with different concentrations of BS and BCM. The MTT assay was
performed to measure the number of viable cells in the culture. Cell
proliferation was analyzed using the paired-sample t test.
Results: Cell proliferation increased as the concentration of bacteria was
increased logarithmically (0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.9, 3, 9, 30 μL/mL). In comparison with 
BS, cells treated with BCM showed increased cell proliferation at lower
concentrations. This effect was caused by removing the "de Man, Rogosa, and
Sharpe" (MRS) broth medium from the BCM culture. The optimal concentration of
bacteria with the most significant effect on rBMSCs proliferation was determined.
Conclusion: A significant increase in the proliferation of stromal cells was
observed; confirming the stimulatory potential of probiotics (B. bifidum) on
various cells. The use of products containing probiotic bacteria can increase the
proliferation potential of BMSCs.

Copyright: © Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences.

DOI: 10.30476/ijms.2019.45772 
PMCID: PMC7395953
PMID: 32801416 

