
1. BMC Microbiol. 2020 Sep 10;20(1):277. doi: 10.1186/s12866-020-01962-w.

Genotyping and plant-derived glycan utilization analysis of Bifidobacterium
strains from mother-infant pairs.

Kan Z(1), Luo B(1), Cai J(1), Zhang Y(1), Tian F(2), Ni Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Xinjiang, China.
(2)School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, Jiangsu,
China.
(3)School of Food Science and Technology, Shihezi University, Xinjiang, China.
niyqlzu@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Bifidobacteria are important probiotics; some of the beneficial
effects of bifidobacteria are achieved by the hydrolysis of glycans in the human 
gut. However, because the diet of breastfed infants typically lacks plant-derived
glycans, in the gut environment of mothers and their breastfed infants, the
mother will intake a variety of plant-derived glycans, such as from onions and
bananas, through her diet. Under this assumption, we are interested in whether
the same species of bifidobacteria isolated from mother-infant pairs present a
distinction in their hydrolysis of plant-derived carbohydrates.
RESULTS: Among the 36 Bifidobacterium strains, bifidobacterial carbohydrate
utilization showed two trends related to the intestinal environment where the
bacteria lived. Compared with infant-type bifidobacterial strains, adult-type
bifidobacterial strains preferred to use plant-derived glycans. Of these strains,
10 isolates, 2 Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum (B. pseudocatenulatum), 2
Bifidobacterium pseudolongum (B. pseudolongum), 2 Bifidobacterium bifidum (B.
bifidum), 2 Bifidobacterium breve (B. breve), and 2 Bifidobacterium longum (B.
longum), were shared between the mother-infant pairs. Moreover, the repetitive
sequence-based polymerase chain reaction (rep-PCR) results illustrated that B.
pseudolongum and B. bifidum showed genotypic similarities of 95.3 and 98.2%,
respectively. Combined with the carbohydrate fermentation study, these results
indicated that the adult-type strains have a stronger ability to use
plant-derived glycans than infant-type strains. Our work suggests that
bifidobacterial carbohydrate metabolism differences resulted in the selective
adaptation to the distinct intestinal environment of an adult or breastfed
infant.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study revealed that the different gut environments can
lead to the differences in the polysaccharide utilization in the same strains of 
bifidobacterial strains, suggesting a further goal of investigating the exact
expression of certain enzymes in response to specific carbon sources.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-020-01962-w 
PMCID: PMC7488109
PMID: 32912151 

