
1. Food Funct. 2020 Jul 1;11(7):6115-6127. doi: 10.1039/c9fo02905b. Epub 2020 Jun
23.

Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Lactobacillus rhamnosus alleviate non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease induced by a high-fat, high-cholesterol diet through
modulation of different gut microbiota-dependent pathways.

Wang G (1), Jiao T , Xu Y , Li D , Si Q , Hao J , Zhao J , Zhang H , Chen W .

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi
214122, P. R. China. zhaojianxin@jiangnan.edu.cn.

The incidence of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has increased year on 
year, and the increasing appreciation of the importance of gut microbiota
provides novel therapeutic avenues for the treatment of NAFLD. To explore the
similarities and differences between lactic acid bacteria (LAB) known to
alleviate NAFLD, we selected three strains of Bifidobacterium adolescentis and
three strains of Lactobacillus rhamnosus to administer to C57BL/6J mice on a
high-fat, high-cholesterol diet (HFHCD) for 23 weeks. Subsequently, the effects
of the LAB were evaluated through various measures. The six LAB strains were
found to have varying degrees of efficacy in the prevention of NAFLD. We found
that there were interspecific and intraspecific differences in the beneficial
effects, mainly with respect to energy metabolism, lipid metabolism and
short-chain fatty acid concentration. Three strains of B. adolescentis and one
strain of L. rhamnosus were found to relieve NAFLD by increasing the
concentration of short-chain fatty acids in the intestine of NAFLD mice. The
other two strains of L. rhamnosus, LGG and L10-1, relieved NAFLD through
different ways, LGG modulated energy metabolism and lipid metabolism, and L10-1
reduced liver inflammation. Examination of gut microbiota indicated that the six 
LAB strains could block the HFHCD-induced elevation of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes
and alter the dominant species within the gut. These results suggest that B.
adolescentis and L. rhamnosus can inhibit the development of NAFLD by regulating 
gut microbiota, and their use is thus a promising therapeutic strategy.

DOI: 10.1039/c9fo02905b 
PMID: 32573567 

