
1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2020 Aug 19:e13966. doi: 10.1111/nmo.13966. [Epub ahead
of print]

An altered composition of fecal microbiota, organic acids, and the effect of
probiotics in the guinea pig model of postoperative ileus.

Shin SY(1)(2), Hussain Z(1), Lee YJ(1), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study is to investigate the altered composition of
fecal microbiota, organic acids, and the effect of probiotics in the guinea pig
model of the postoperative ileus (POI).
METHODS: A laparotomy with cecal manipulation was performed to induce POI in
guinea pigs. Fecal pellets were collected before the operation (the baseline) and
1, 3, and 5 days after the operation. The extracted fecal DNA was amplified and
sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq sequencing system. The same POI procedures
were performed after oral pretreatment of the probiotics for 7 days before
operation. The effect of the probiotics on the selected taxa and fecal acetate
were evaluated, as were the butyrate levels. The colonic transit was assessed by 
measurement of the fecal pellet output.
KEY RESULTS: The communities of the baseline and POI groups indicated
significantly distinct composition. The genera Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus 
were more abundant in the baseline group compared with the POI groups, and
Bacteroides and Blautia were more abundant in the POI groups. Decreased
abundances of the species Bifidobacterium bifidum and Bifidobacterium longum
after the POI procedure were significantly increased in the probiotics group. The
decreased fecal butyrate level after the POI procedure was significantly
increased, and colonic transit was significantly improved in the probiotics
group.
CONCLUSIONS AND INFERENCES: POI induces gut bacterial dysbiosis. Moreover,
pretreatment of probiotics before operation restores the beneficial bacterial
species, butyrate production, and bowel movement. The modulation of gut
microbiota may help the treatment and prevention of POI.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.13966 
PMID: 32815235 

