
1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2020 May 1;96(5). pii: fiaa049. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiaa049.

Investigating bifidobacteria and human milk oligosaccharide composition of
lactating mothers.

Lugli GA(1), Duranti S(1), Milani C(1), Mancabelli L(1), Turroni F(1)(2),
Alessandri G(3), Longhi G(4), Anzalone R(4), Viappinai A(4), Tarracchini C(1),
Bernasconi S(2), Yonemitsu C(5), Bode L(5), Goran MI(6), Ossiprandi MC(3), van
Sinderen D(7), Ventura M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Probiogenomics, Department of Chemistry, Life Sciences, and
Environmental Sustainability, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Microbiome Research Hub, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medical Science, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(4)GenProbio srl, Parma, Italy.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Larsson-Rosenquist Foundation Mother-Milk-Infant 
Center of Research Excellence, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, The University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(7)APC Microbiome Institute and School of Microbiology, Bioscience Institute,
National University of Ireland, Cork, Ireland.

Human milk is known to carry its own microbiota, of which the precise origin
remains obscure. Breastfeeding allows mother-to-baby transmission of
microorganisms as well as the transfer of many other milk components, such as
human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), which act as metabolizable substrates for
particular bacteria, such as bifidobacteria, residing in infant intestinal tract.
In the current study, we report the HMO composition of 249 human milk samples, in
163 of which we quantified the abundance of members of the Bifidobacterium genus 
using a combination of metagenomic and flow cytometric approaches. Metagenomic
data allowed us to identify four clusters dominated by Bifidobacterium
adolescentis and Bifidobacterium pseudolongum, Bifidobacterium crudilactis or
Bifidobacterium dentium, as well as a cluster represented by a heterogeneous mix 
of bifidobacterial species such as Bifidobacterium breve and Bifidobacterium
longum. Furthermore, in vitro growth assays on HMOs coupled with in silico
glycobiome analyses allowed us to elucidate that members of the Bifidobacterium
bifidum and B. breve species exhibit the greatest ability to degrade and grow on 
HMOs. Altogether, these findings indicate that the bifidobacterial component of
the human milk microbiota is not strictly correlated with their ability to
metabolize HMOs.

© FEMS 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiaa049 
PMID: 32188978 

