
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 21. pii: AEM.01203-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01203-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Three Candidate Probiotic Strains Impact Gut Microbiota and Induce Anergy in Mice
with Cow's Milk Allergy.

Esber N(1), Mauras A(1), Delannoy J(1), Labellie C(1), Mayeur C(2), Caillaud
MA(1), Kashima T(1), Souchaud L(1), Nicolis I(3), Kapel N(1)(4), Waligora-Dupriet
AJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)UMR-S 1139, Université de Paris, INSERM,, F-75006, Paris, France.
(2)Micalis Institute, AgroParisTech, INRAE, Université Paris-Saclay, 78350
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(3)UR 7537 - BioSTM, Université de Paris, F-75006, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Coprology, APHP Sorbonne Université, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital,
Paris, France.
(5)UMR-S 1139, Université de Paris, INSERM,, F-75006, Paris, France
anne-judith.waligora@u-paris.fr.

Cow's milk allergy is a worldwide public health issue, especially since there is 
no effective treatment, apart from milk and dairy product avoidance. The aim of
this study was to assess the beneficial role of three probiotic strains
previously selected for their prophylactic properties in a mouse model of
β-lactoglobulin allergy. Administration of Lactobacillus rhamnosus LA305, L.
salivarius LA307, or Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis LA308, for 3 weeks
post-sensitization and challenge modified the composition of the gut microbiota
with an increase in Prevotella NK3B31 and a decrease in Marvinbryantia, belonging
to the Lachnospiraceae group. Although no impact on markers of sensitization was 
detected, modifications of foxp3, tgfβ and il10 ileal gene expression as well as 
plasma metobolomic alteration in the tryptophan pathway were observed. Moreover, 
ex-vivo studies showed that all probiotic strains induced a significant decrease 
in cytokine production by β-lactoglobulin-stimulated splenocytes. Altogether,
these results suggest that the three probiotic strains tested lead to alterations
in immune responses i.e. induction of a tolerogenic anergy and anti-inflammatory 
responses. This anergy could be linked to cecal microbiota modifications although
no impact on fecal SCFA concentration was detected. Anergy could also be linked
to a direct impact of probiotic strains on dendritic cells as co-stimulatory
molecule expression was decreased following their co-incubation with BMDCs. To
conclude, all three candidate probiotic strains induced strain-specific gut
microbiota and metabolic changes, which could potentially be beneficial for
general health, as well as anergy that could contribute to oral tolerance
acquisition.IMPORTANCE We previously showed that three probiotic strains i.e.
Lactobacillus rhamnosus LA305, L. salivarius LA307, and Bifidobacterium longum
subsp. infantis LA308 exerted different preventive effects in a mouse model of
cow's milk allergy. In this study, we evaluated their potential benefits in a
curative mouse model of cow's milk allergy. When administered for 3-weeks after
the sensitization process and a first allergic reaction, none of the strains
modified the levels of sensitization and allergic markers. However, all three
strains affected gut bacteria communities and modified immune and inflammatory
responses leading to a tolerogenic profile. Interestingly, all three strains
exerted a direct effect on dendritic cells which are known to play a major role
in food sensitization through their potentially tolerogenic properties and
anergic responses. Altogether, these data indicate a potentially beneficial role 
of the probiotic strains tested in this model of cow's milk allergy with regard
to tolerance acquisition.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01203-20 
PMID: 32826221 

