
1. Nutrition. 2020 Jul 11;79-80:110941. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2020.110941. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Reduction of intestinal trimethylamine by probiotics ameliorated lipid metabolic 
disorders associated with atherosclerosis.

Liang X(1), Zhang Z(1), Lv Y(1), Tong L(1), Liu T(1), Yi H(1), Zhou X(2), Yu
Z(3), Tian X(1), Cui Q(1), Yang J(1), Gong P(1), Zhang L(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
China.
(2)Qingdao Central Hospital, Qingdao, China.
(3)Oncology Department, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao,
China.
(4)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
China. Electronic address: zhanglanwei@ouc.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to explore the effect of trimethylamine
(TMA)-degrading probiotic agents on trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) and the related
lipid metabolism in mice.
METHODS: Ten lipid-lowering strains were detected with TMA-degradation capacity
in vitro. After probiotic intervention for the mice on a high-choline diet, TMA
content in cecum and TMA and TMAO in serum was explored, as well as the
expression of key gene flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) of the TMA-TMAO
metabolism. The expression of genes related to the lipid metabolism was also
investigated by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. Finally,
the colonization of functional strains in the intestine were examined.
RESULTS: Five of 10 lipid-lowering strains effectively degraded TMA in vitro, and
the TMA level in the cecum of mice were reduced after probiotic intervention. TMA
level and TMAO in serum were also significantly reduced by the strains (P <
0.05), but not due to the regulation of FMO3. Probiotic agents could improve the 
lipid metabolism by acting on the Farnesoid X receptor and cholesterol 7-alpha
hydroxy-lase. Among the strains, Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis F1-3-2
showed the most prominent performance and colonized in the cecum of mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Bif. animalis subsp. lactis F1-3-2 could be colonized in the cecum, 
and might directly degrade TMA or change the structure of intestinal flora. The
strain had an effect on TMA and TMAO levels in vivo by decreasing cecum TMA. The 
strain was demonstrated to participate in the TMA-TMAO regulation, improve the
lipid metabolism, and alleviate atherosclerosis caused by TMAO. However, FMO3 had
not changed in this process, and needs further study.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nut.2020.110941 
PMID: 32858376 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest No conflict of interest
exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all
authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that 
the work described was original research that has not been published previously, 
and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All
the authors listed have approved the manuscript that is enclosed.

