
1. Pediatr Res. 2020 Sep 18. doi: 10.1038/s41390-020-01135-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploratory studies from the PiPS trial fail to find evidence that
Bifidobacterium breve BBG-001 modifies intestinal barrier function.

Fleming P(1)(2), Wilks M(3)(4), Eaton S(5), Panton N(4), Hutchinson R(6),
Akyempon A(7), Hardy P(8), Millar MR(3)(4), Costeloe K(7)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Homerton University Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
Paulfleming1@nhs.net.
(2)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK. Paulfleming1@nhs.net.
(3)Department of Infection, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(4)Blizard Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.
(5)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, University College London, 
London, UK.
(6)Centre for Genomics and Child Health, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK.
(7)Homerton University Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)Birmingham Clinical Trials Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Uncertainty remains about the role of probiotics to prevent
necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) some of which arises from the variety of
probiotic interventions used in different trials, many with no prior evidence of 
potential efficacy. Mechanistic studies of intestinal barrier function embedded
in a large probiotic trial could provide evidence about which properties of
probiotics might be important for NEC prevention thus facilitating identification
of strains with therapeutic potential.
METHODS: Intestinal permeability, stool microbiota, SCFAs and mucosal
inflammation were assessed from the second postnatal week in babies enrolled to a
randomised controlled trial of B. breve BBG-001 (the PiPS trial). Results were
compared by allocation and by stool colonisation with the probiotic.
RESULTS: Ninety-four preterm babies were recruited across six nested studies. B. 
breve BBG-001 content was higher by allocation and colonisation;
Enterobacteriaceae and acetic acid levels were higher by colonisation. No measure
of intestinal barrier function showed differences. The PiPS trial found no
evidence of efficacy to reduce NEC.
CONCLUSIONS: That the negative results of the PiPS trial were associated with
failure of this probiotic to modify intestinal barrier function supports the
possibility that the tests described here have the potential to identify strains 
to progress to large clinical trials.
IMPACT: Uncertainty about the therapeutic role of probiotics to prevent
necrotising enterocolitis is in part due to the wide range of bacterial strains
with no previous evidence of efficacy used in clinical trials.We hypothesised
that mechanistic studies embedded in a probiotic trial would provide evidence
about which properties of probiotics might be important for NEC prevention.The
finding that the probiotic strain tested, Bifidobacterium breve BBG-001, showed
neither effects on intestinal barrier function nor clinical efficacy supports the
possibility that these tests have the potential to identify strains to progress
to large clinical trials.Fig. 1FOETAL INTESTINE: THE INTESTINAL LUMEN (A) IN THE 
FOETUS IS STERILE; INTESTINAL MUCUS (B) IS WATERY; TLR4 RECEPTORS (C) ARE
ABUNDANTLY EXPRESSED ON ENTEROCYTES; LARGE PROTEINS FROM AMNIOTIC FLUID (D) ARE
EASILY ABSORBED BETWEEN WIDELY SPACED ENTEROCYTES (E) AND ENTER THE CIRCULATION
(F).: Preterm neonatal intestine: the intestinal lumen (A) contains a higher
proportion of potentially pathogenic (purple) than beneficial (green) bacteria;
intestinal mucus is more abundant but still watery (B); potentially pathogenic
bacteria are in close proximity to TLR4 receptors (C); in the absence of food,
the intercellular gap remains wide (D); fluctuations in intestinal blood flow
produces vasodilating substances (e.g. nitric oxide) (E). Necrotising
enterocolitis: potentially pathogenic bacteria (purple) outnumber other bacteria 
in the intestinal lumen (A); intestinal mucus (B) may be interrupted allowing
some bacteria to adhere to TLR4 receptors (C); activation of TLR4 leads to
downstream production of IL8 through the NF-κB pathway (D) initiating further
inflammation; bacterial translocation occurs through (E) and between (F)
enterocytes into the systemic circulation.

DOI: 10.1038/s41390-020-01135-5 
PMID: 32947603 

