
1. Benef Microbes. 2020 Aug 12;11(4):347-359. doi: 10.3920/BM2019.0197. Epub 2020
Jul 28.

Effects of a high-fat-diet supplemented with probiotics and ω3-fatty acids on
appetite regulatory neuropeptides and neurotransmitters in a pig model.

Valent D(1), Arroyo L(1), Fàbrega E(2), Font-I-Furnols M(3), Rodríguez-Palmero
M(4), Moreno-Muñoz JA(4), Tibau J(3), Bassols A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària.
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Food Science - Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries, IRTA,
Monells, Girona, Spain.
(3)Animal Science - Institut de Recerca i Tecnologia Agroalimentàries, IRTA,
Monells, Girona, Spain.
(4)Laboratorios Ordesa S.L., Barcelona Science Park, Barcelona, Spain.

The pig is a valuable animal model to study obesity in humans due to the
physiological similarity between humans and pigs in terms of digestive and
associated metabolic processes. The dietary use of vegetal protein, probiotics
and omega-3 fatty acids is recommended to control weight gain and to fight
obesity-associated metabolic disorders. Likewise, there are recent reports on
their beneficial effects on brain functions. The hypothalamus is the central part
of the brain that regulates food intake by means of the production of food
intake-regulatory hypothalamic neuropeptides, as neuropeptide Y (NPY), orexin A
and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC), and neurotransmitters, such as dopamine and
serotonin. Other mesolimbic areas, such as the hippocampus, are also involved in 
the control of food intake. In this study, the effect of a high fat diet (HFD)
alone or supplemented with these additives on brain neuropeptides and
neurotransmitters was assessed in forty-three young pigs fed for 10 weeks with a 
control diet (T1), a high fat diet (HFD, T2), and HFD with vegetal protein
supplemented with Bifidobacterium breve CECT8242 alone (T3) or in combination
with omega-3 fatty acids (T4). A HFD provoked changes in regulatory neuropeptides
and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) in the hypothalamus and alterations
mostly in the dopaminergic system in the ventral hippocampus. Supplementation of 
the HFD with B. breve CECT8242, especially in combination with omega-3 fatty
acids, was able to partially reverse the effects of HFD. Correlations between
productive and neurochemical parameters supported these findings. These results
confirm that pigs are an appropriate animal model alternative to rodents for the 
study of the effects of HFD on weight gain and obesity. Furthermore, they
indicate the potential benefits of probiotics and omega-3 fatty acids on brain
function.

DOI: 10.3920/BM2019.0197 
PMID: 32720835 

