
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Aug 10. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09694-z.
[Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of Porcine Intestinal Epitheliocytes as an In vitro Immunoassay System
for the Selection of Probiotic Bifidobacteria to Alleviate Inflammatory Bowel
Disease.

Sato N(1)(2), Yuzawa M(1)(2), Aminul MI(1)(2), Tomokiyo M(1)(2), Albarracin
L(1)(3)(4), Garcia-Castillo V(5), Ideka-Ohtsubo W(1)(2), Iwabuchi N(6), Xiao
JZ(6), Garcia-Cancino A(5), Villena J(7)(8), Kitazawa H(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Food and Feed Immunology Group, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, 981-8555, Japan.
(2)Livestock Immunology Unit, International Education and Research Center for
Food Agricultural Immunology (CFAI), Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Immunobiotechnology, Reference Centre for Lactobacilli
(CERELA-CONICET), San Miguel de Tucuman, Tucuman, Argentina.
(4)Laboratory of Computing Science, Faculty of Exact Sciences and Technology,
Tucuman University, San Miguel de Tucuman, Tucuman, Argentina.
(5)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenicity, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
University of Concepcion, Concepcion, Chile.
(6)Food Science and Technology Institute, Morinaga Milk Industry Co. Ltd, Zama,
Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)Food and Feed Immunology Group, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, 981-8555, Japan. jcvillena@cerela.org.ar.
(8)Laboratory of Immunobiotechnology, Reference Centre for Lactobacilli
(CERELA-CONICET), San Miguel de Tucuman, Tucuman, Argentina.
jcvillena@cerela.org.ar.
(9)Food and Feed Immunology Group, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, 981-8555, Japan. haruki.kitazawa.c7@tohoku.ac.jp.
(10)Livestock Immunology Unit, International Education and Research Center for
Food Agricultural Immunology (CFAI), Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. haruki.kitazawa.c7@tohoku.ac.jp.

The use of in vitro systems that allow efficient selection of probiotic
candidates with immunomodulatory properties could significantly minimize the use 
of experimental animals. In this work, we generated an in vitro immunoassay
system based on porcine intestinal epithelial (PIE) cells and dextran sodium
sulfate (DSS) administration that could be useful for the selection and
characterization of potential probiotic strains to be used in inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD) patients. Our strategy was based on two fundamental pillars: on the
one hand, the capacity of PIE cells to create a monolayer by attaching to
neighboring cells and efficiently mount inflammatory responses and, on the other 
hand, the use of two probiotic bifidobacteria strains that have been
characterized in terms of their immunomodulatory capacities, particularly in
mouse IBD models and patients. Our results demonstrated that DSS administration
can alter the epithelial barrier created in vitro by PIE cells and induce a
potent inflammatory response, characterized by increases in the expression levels
of several inflammatory factors including TNF-α, IL-1α, CCL4, CCL8, CCL11, CXCL5,
CXCL9, CXCL10, SELL, SELE, EPCAM, VCAM, NCF2, and SAA2. In addition, we
demonstrated that Bifidobacterium breve M-16V and B. longum BB536 are able to
regulate the C-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) intracellular signalling pathway,
reducing the DSS-induced alterations of the in vitro epithelial barrier and
differentially regulating the inflammatory response in a strain-dependent
fashion. The good correlation between our in vitro findings in PIE cells and
previous studies in animal models and IBD patients shows the potential value of
our system to select new probiotic candidates in an efficient way.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09694-z 
PMID: 32779098 

