
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18. doi: 10.1111/jam.14824. [Epub ahead of print]

Acerola (Malpighia glabra L.) and guava (Psidium guayaba L.) industrial
processing by-products stimulate probiotic Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium
growth and induce beneficial changes in colonic microbiota.

Menezes FNDD(1), de Melo FHC(2), Vieira ARS(1), Almeida ÉTC(1), Lima MS(3),
Aquino JS(4), Gomez-Zavaglia A(5), Magnani M(2), de Souza EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology, Department of Nutrition, Health Sciences
Center, Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, Brazil.
(2)Laboratory of Microbial Processes in Foods, Department of Food Engineering,
Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, Brazil.
(3)Department of Food Technology, Federal Institute of Sertão de Pernambuco,
Petrolina, Brazil.
(4)Laboratory of Experimental Nutrition, Department of Nutrition, Health Sciences
Center, Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, Brazil.
(5)Center for Research and Development in Food Cryotechnology (CCT - CONICET La
Plata), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

AIMS: This study evaluated whether by-products from industrial processing of
acerola (Malpighia glabra L.; AB) and guava (Psidium guajava L.; GB) fruit may
stimulate the growth and metabolism of probiotic Lactobacillus and
Bifidobacterium and induce changes in human colonic microbiota.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The ability of non-digested and digested AB or GB to
stimulate the growth ad metabolism of Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-05,
Lactobacillus casei L-26 and Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12 was
evaluated. Changes in populations of distinct bacterial groups of human colonic
microbiota induced by digested AB and GB were evaluated using an in vitro colonic
fermentation system. Non-digested and digested AB and GB favoured probiotic
growth. No difference among counts of probiotics in media with glucose,
fructooligosaccharides and non-digested and digested AB and GB was found during a
48-h cultivation. Cultivation of probiotics in media with non-digested and
digested AB and GB resulted in decreased pH, increased organic acid production
and sugar consumption over time. Digested AB and GB caused overall beneficial
changes in abundance of Bifidobacterium spp., Lactobacillus-Enterococcus,
Eubacterium rectall-Clostridium coccoides and Bacteroides-Provotella populations,
besides to decrease the pH and increase the short-chain fatty acid production
during a 24-h in vitro colonic fermentation.
CONCLUSION: AB and GB could be novel prebiotic ingredients because they can
stimulate the growth and metabolism of probiotics and induce overall beneficial
changes in human colonic microbiota.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: AB and GB stimulated the growth and
metabolism of probiotics, in addition to induce beneficial alterations in human
colonic microbiota composition and increase short-chain fatty acid production.
These results characterize AB and GB as potential prebiotic ingredients and fruit
processing by-products as sources of added-value compounds.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14824 
PMID: 32808408 

