
1. FASEB J. 2020 Aug 11. doi: 10.1096/fj.202001532R. [Epub ahead of print]

Probiotic Bifidobacterium breve prevents DOCA-salt hypertension.

Robles-Vera I(1), de la Visitación N(1), Toral M(2)(3), Sánchez M(1)(4), Romero
M(1)(3)(4), Gómez-Guzmán M(1)(4), Yang T(5), Izquierdo-García JL(6),
Guerra-Hernández E(7), Ruiz-Cabello J(6), Raizada MK(8), Pérez-Vizcaíno
F(9)(10)(11), Jiménez R(1)(3)(4), Duarte J(1)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy and Center for Biomedical
Research (CIBM), University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)Gene Regulation in Cardiovascular Remodeling and Inflammation Group, Centro
Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)CIBER-Enfermedades Cardiovasculares (CiberCV), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria de Granada, Granada, Spain.
(5)Microbiome Consortium and Center for Hypertension and Precision Medicine,
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Toledo College of
Medicine and Life Sciences, Toledo, OH, USA.
(6)CIC biomaGUNE, Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain.
(7)Department of Nutrition and Bromatology, University of Granada, Granada,
Spain.
(8)Department of Physiology and Functional Genomics, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(9)Departamento de Farmacología y Toxicología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad 
Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(10)Ciber Enfermedades Respiratorias (Ciberes), Madrid, Spain.
(11)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón (IISGM), Madrid, Spain.

Many probiotics that affect gut microbial ecology have been shown to produce
beneficial effects on renin-angiotensin-dependent rodent models and human
hypertension. We hypothesized that Bifidobacterium breve CECT7263 (BFM) would
attenuate hypertension in deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA)-salt rats, a
renin-independent model of hypertension. Rats were randomly divided into five
groups: control, DOCA-salt, treated DOCA-salt-BFM, treated DOCA-salt-butyrate,
and treated DOCA-salt-acetate, for 5 weeks. BFM prevented the increase in
systolic blood pressure, cardiac weight, and renal damage induced by DOCA-salt.
BFM increased acetate-producing bacterial population and gut acetate levels,
improved colonic integrity, normalized endotoxemia, plasma trimethylamine (TMA)
levels, and restored the Th17 and Treg content in mesenteric lymph nodes and
aorta. Furthermore, BFM improved nitric oxide-dependent vasorelaxation induced by
acetylcholine in aortic rings and reduced NADPH oxidase activity in DOCA-salt
animals. These protective effects were mimicked by acetate, but not by butyrate
supplementation. These data demonstrate that BFM induces changes in gut
microbiota linked with attenuation of endothelial dysfunction and increase in
blood pressure in this low-renin form of hypertension. These beneficial effects
seem to be mediated by increased acetate and reduced TMA production by gut
microbiota, thus, improving gut integrity and restoring Th17/Tregs polarization
and endotoxemia.

© 2020 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202001532R 
PMID: 32780919 

