
1. mSystems. 2020 Sep 8;5(5). pii: e00645-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00645-20.

Pivotal Roles for pH, Lactate, and Lactate-Utilizing Bacteria in the Stability of
a Human Colonic Microbial Ecosystem.

Wang SP(#)(1), Rubio LA(#)(2), Duncan SH(3), Donachie GE(3), Holtrop G(4), Lo
G(3), Farquharson FM(3), Wagner J(5), Parkhill J(6), Louis P(3), Walker AW(7),
Flint HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, People's Republic 
of China.
(2)Physiology and Biochemistry of Animal Nutrition (EEZ, CSIC), Granada, Spain.
(3)Gut Health Group, Rowett Institute, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.
(4)Biomathematics and Statistics Scotland (BioSS), Aberdeen, Scotland, UK.
(5)Pathogen Genomics Group, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire,
UK.
(6)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Gut Health Group, Rowett Institute, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill,
Aberdeen, Scotland, UK alan.walker@abdn.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

Lactate can be produced by many gut bacteria, but in adults its accumulation in
the colon is often an indicator of microbiota perturbation. Using continuous
culture anaerobic fermentor systems, we found that lactate concentrations
remained low in communities of human colonic bacteria maintained at pH 6.5, even 
when dl-lactate was infused at 10 or 20 mM. In contrast, lower pH (5.5) led to
periodic lactate accumulation following lactate infusion in three fecal microbial
communities examined. Lactate accumulation was concomitant with greatly reduced
butyrate and propionate production and major shifts in microbiota composition,
with Bacteroidetes and anaerobic Firmicutes being replaced by Actinobacteria,
lactobacilli, and Proteobacteria Pure-culture experiments confirmed that
Bacteroides and Firmicutes isolates were susceptible to growth inhibition by
relevant concentrations of lactate and acetate, whereas the lactate-producer
Bifidobacterium adolescentis was resistant. To investigate system behavior
further, we used a mathematical model (microPop) based on 10 microbial functional
groups. By incorporating differential growth inhibition, our model reproduced the
chaotic behavior of the system, including the potential for lactate infusion both
to promote and to rescue the perturbed system. The modeling revealed that system 
behavior is critically dependent on the proportion of the community able to
convert lactate into butyrate or propionate. Communities with low numbers of
lactate-utilizing bacteria are inherently less stable and more prone to
lactate-induced perturbations. These findings can help us to understand the
consequences of interindividual microbiota variation for dietary responses and
microbiota changes associated with disease states.IMPORTANCE Lactate is formed by
many species of colonic bacteria, and can accumulate to high levels in the colons
of inflammatory bowel disease subjects. Conversely, in healthy colons lactate is 
metabolized by lactate-utilizing species to the short-chain fatty acids butyrate 
and propionate, which are beneficial for the host. Here, we investigated the
impact of continuous lactate infusions (up to 20 mM) at two pH values (6.5 and
5.5) on human colonic microbiota responsiveness and metabolic outputs. At pH 5.5 
in particular, lactate tended to accumulate in tandem with decreases in butyrate 
and propionate and with corresponding changes in microbial composition. Moreover,
microbial communities with low numbers of lactate-utilizing bacteria were
inherently less stable and therefore more prone to lactate-induced perturbations.
These investigations provide clear evidence of the important role these lactate
utilizers may play in health maintenance. These should therefore be considered as
potential new therapeutic probiotics to combat microbiota perturbations.

Copyright © 2020 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00645-20 
PMCID: PMC7483512
PMID: 32900872 

