
1. mSystems. 2020 Sep 29;5(5). pii: e00911-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00911-20.

Strain-Level Analysis of Bifidobacterium spp. from Gut Microbiomes of Adults with
Differing Lactase Persistence Genotypes.

Schmidt V(1), Enav H(1), Spector TD(2), Youngblut ND(1), Ley RE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Twin Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London,
London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany rley@tuebingen.mpg.de.

One of the strongest associations between human genetics and the gut microbiome
is a greater relative abundance of Bifidobacterium in adults with lactase gene
(LCT) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with lactase
nonpersistence (GG genotypes), versus lactase persistence (AA/AG genotypes). To
gain a finer-grained phylogenetic resolution of this association, we interrogated
1,680 16S rRNA libraries and 245 metagenomes from gut microbiomes of adults with 
various lactase persistence genotypes. We further employed a novel
genome-capture-based enrichment of Bifidobacterium DNA from a subset of these
metagenomes, including monozygotic (MZ) twin pairs, each sampled 2 or 3 times. B.
adolescentis and B. longum were the most abundant Bifidobacterium species
regardless of host LCT genotype. LCT genotypes could not be discriminated based
on relative abundances of Bifidobacterium species or Bifidobacterium community
structure. Three distinct metagenomic analysis methods of
Bifidobacterium-enriched DNA revealed intraindividual temporal stability of B.
longum, B. adolescentis, and B. bifidum strains against the background of a
changeable microbiome. Two of our three methods also observed greater strain
sharing within MZ twin pairs than within unrelated individuals for B.
adolescentis, while no method revealed an effect of host LCT genotype on
Bifidobacterium strain composition. Our results support a "rising tide lifts all 
boats" model for the dominant bifidobacteria in the adult gut: their higher
abundance in lactase-nonpersistent than in lactase-persistent individuals results
from an expansion at the genus level. Bifidobacterium species are known to be
transmitted from mother to child and stable within individuals in infancy and
childhood: our results extend this stability into adulthood.IMPORTANCE When
humans domesticated animals, some adapted genetically to digest milk into
adulthood (lactase persistence). The gut microbiomes of people with
lactase-persistent genotypes (AA or AG) differ from those with
lactase-nonpersistent genotypes (GG) by containing fewer bacteria belonging to
the bifidobacteria, a group which contains beneficial species. Here, we asked if 
the gut microbiomes of adults with GG and AA/AG genotypes differ in the species
of bifidobacteria present. In particular, we used a novel technique which allowed
us to compare bifidobacteria in adults at the strain level, without the
traditional need for culturing. Our results show that the GG genotype enhances
the abundance of bifidobacteria regardless of species. We also noted that a
person's specific strains are recoverable several years later, and twins can
share the same ones. Given that bifidobacteria are inherited from mother to
child, strain stability over time in adulthood suggests long-term,
multigenerational inheritance.

Copyright © 2020 Schmidt et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00911-20 
PMCID: PMC7527142
PMID: 32994293 

