
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2020 Jun 23. doi: 10.1002/bit.27471. [Epub ahead of print]

On the donor substrate dependence of group-transfer reactions by hydrolytic
enzymes: Insight from kinetic analysis of sucrose phosphorylase-catalyzed
transglycosylation.

Klimacek M(1), Sigg A(1), Nidetzky B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Biochemical Engineering, Graz University of
Technology, NAWI Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Austrian Centre of Industrial Biotechnology (acib), Graz, Austria.

Chemical group-transfer reactions by hydrolytic enzymes have considerable
importance in biocatalytic synthesis and are exploited broadly in
commercial-scale chemical production. Mechanistically, these reactions have in
common the involvement of a covalent enzyme intermediate which is formed upon
enzyme reaction with the donor substrate and is subsequently intercepted by a
suitable acceptor. Here, we studied the glycosylation of glycerol from sucrose by
sucrose phosphorylase (SucP) to clarify a peculiar, yet generally important
characteristic of this reaction: partitioning between glycosylation of glycerol
and hydrolysis depends on the type and the concentration of the donor substrate
used (here: sucrose, α-d-glucose 1-phosphate (G1P)). We develop a kinetic
framework to analyze the effect and provide evidence that, when G1P is used as
donor substrate, hydrolysis occurs not only from the β-glucosyl-enzyme
intermediate (E-Glc), but additionally from a noncovalent complex of E-Glc and
substrate which unlike E-Glc is unreactive to glycerol. Depending on the relative
rates of hydrolysis of free and substrate-bound E-Glc, inhibition (Leuconostoc
mesenteroides SucP) or apparent activation (Bifidobacterium adolescentis SucP) is
observed at high donor substrate concentration. At a G1P concentration that
excludes the substrate-bound E-Glc, the transfer/hydrolysis ratio changes to a
value consistent with reaction exclusively through E-Glc, independent of the
donor substrate used. Collectively, these results give explanation for a kinetic 
behavior of SucP not previously accounted for, provide essential basis for design
and optimization of the synthetic reaction, and establish a theoretical framework
for the analysis of kinetically analogous group-transfer reactions by hydrolytic 
enzymes.

© 2020 The Authors. Biotechnology and Bioengineering published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.27471 
PMID: 32573774 

