
1. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 2020 Aug 27. doi: 10.1007/s12223-020-00815-3. [Epub
ahead of print]

Impact of cultivation strategy, freeze-drying process, and storage conditions on 
survival, membrane integrity, and inactivation kinetics of Bifidobacterium
longum.

Haindl R(1), Neumayr A(2), Frey A(2), Kulozik U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Chair of Food and Bioprocess Engineering, Technical University of Munich,
Weihenstephaner Berg 1, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany. regina.haindl@tum.de.
(2)Chair of Food and Bioprocess Engineering, Technical University of Munich,
Weihenstephaner Berg 1, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.

Bifidobacterium longum, one of the main microorganisms in the human gut, is used 
as an adjunct to lactic acid starter cultures or sold as a probiotic product.
Therefore, Bifidobacterium longum cell suspensions get freeze-dried with
protective additives to prevent activity losses. To date, investigations covering
growth and inactivation kinetics of Bifidobacterium longum during the whole
process (cultivation, drying, and storage) have been lacking. In this study, the 
effect of cultivation conditions and shelf temperature as well as the influence
of protectants (maltodextrin, glucitol, trehalose) at various concentrations on
cell survival during freeze-drying was assessed. Drying was followed by a storage
at + 4 째C and + 20 째C for 70 days to evaluate inactivation kinetics. The impact
of the different factors was assessed by measuring surival rate and residual
moisture content at various points of time over the whole process. In parallel
cell membrane integrity and glass transition were determined to reveal
inactivation effects. Cultivation strategy had a strong influence on survival
with a huge potential for process improvement. A pH of 6.0 at the growth optimum 
of the strain provides better conditions regarding cell survival after drying
than free acidification (non-regulated pH conditions). During the drying step,
membrane leakage due to the removal of water is the main reason for the
inactivation in this process step. In this study, the highest survival of 49% was
obtained with cells dried at + 35 째C shelf temperature with an addition of
maltodextrin (75% bacterial dry matter, w/w). The results show that
Bifidobacterium longum cells are mostly inactivated during drying, whereas
storage conditions at + 4 째C with an addition of 75% BDM maltodextrin relative to
bacterial dry mass prevent cell loss completely.

DOI: 10.1007/s12223-020-00815-3 
PMID: 32852726 

