
1. Clin Nutr. 2020 May 16. pii: S0261-5614(20)30224-7. doi:
10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.008. [Epub ahead of print]

Impact of short-term overfeeding of saturated or unsaturated fat or sugars on the
gut microbiota in relation to liver fat in obese and overweight adults.

Jian C(1), Luukkonen P(2), Sädevirta S(2), Yki-Järvinen H(2), Salonen A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Human Microbiome Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, Helsinki, Finland;
Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Human Microbiome Research Program, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: anne.salonen@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUNDS & AIMS: Intestinal microbiota may be causally involved in the
pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). We aimed to study the 
effect of short-term overfeeding on human gut microbiota in relation to baseline 
and overfeeding-induced liver steatosis. We also asked whether the baseline
microbiota composition is associated to the overfeeding-induced increase in liver
fat.
METHODS: In a randomized trial, 38 overweight and obese subjects were assigned to
consume an excess of 1000 kcal/day of diets rich in either saturated fat,
unsaturated fat, or simple sugars for 3 weeks. Fasting blood samples and 1H-MR
spectroscopy were used for extensive clinical phenotyping as previously reported 
(PMID: 29844096). Fecal samples were collected for the analysis of the gut
microbiota using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, imputed metagenomics and qPCR.
Microbiota results were correlated with dietary intakes and clinical measurements
before and during overfeeding.
RESULTS: The overall community structure of the microbiota remained highly stable
and personalized during overfeeding based on between-sample Bray-Curtis
dissimilarity, but the relative abundances of individual taxa were altered in a
diet-specific manner: overfeeding saturated fat increased Proteobacteria, while
unsaturated fat increased butyrate producers. Sugar overfeeding increased
Lactococcus and Escherichia coli. Imputed functions of the gut microbiota were
not affected by overfeeding. Several taxa affected by overfeeding significantly
correlated with the changes in host metabolic markers. The baseline levels of
proteobacterial family Desulfovibrionaceae, and especially genus Bilophila, were 
significantly associated to overfeeding-induced liver fat increase independently 
of the diet arm. In general, limited overlap was observed between the
overfeeding-induced microbiota changes and the liver fat-associated microbiota
features at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: Our work indicates that the human gut microbiota is resilient to
short-term overfeeding on community level, but specific taxa are altered on diet 
composition-dependent manner. Generalizable microbiota signatures directly
associated with liver steatosis could not be identified. Instead, the carriage of
Bilophila was identified as a potential novel risk factor for diet-induced liver 
steatosis in humans. Clinical trial registry number: NCT02133144 listed on NIH
website: ClinicalTrials.gov.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.008 
PMID: 32536582 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.

