
1. Environ Int. 2020 Aug 29;144:106062. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106062. [Epub
ahead of print]

Fetal and early postnatal lead exposure measured in teeth associates with infant 
gut microbiota.

Sitarik AR(1), Arora M(2), Austin C(3), Bielak LF(4), Eggers S(5), Johnson CC(6),
Lynch SV(7), Kyun Park S(8), Hank Wu KH(9), Yong GJM(10), Cassidy-Bushrow AE(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA. 
Electronic address: asitari1@hfhs.org.
(2)Senator Frank R Lautenberg Environmental Health Sciences Laboratory,
Department of Environmental Medicine and Public Health, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York City, USA. Electronic address: manish.arora@mssm.edu.
(3)Senator Frank R Lautenberg Environmental Health Sciences Laboratory,
Department of Environmental Medicine and Public Health, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York City, USA. Electronic address:
christine.austin@mssm.edu.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. Electronic
address: lfbielak@umich.edu.
(5)Senator Frank R Lautenberg Environmental Health Sciences Laboratory,
Department of Environmental Medicine and Public Health, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York City, USA. Electronic address:
shoshannah.eggers@mssm.edu.
(6)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA. 
Electronic address: cjohnso1@hfhs.org.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, USA. Electronic address: Susan.Lynch@ucsf.edu.
(8)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA; Department
of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA.
Electronic address: sungkyun@umich.edu.
(9)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA. 
Electronic address: wukh@umich.edu.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, USA. Electronic address: Germaine.Yong@ucsf.edu.
(11)Department of Public Health Sciences, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, USA.
Electronic address: acassid1@hfhs.org.

BACKGROUND: Lead (Pb) is an environmentally ubiquitous heavy metal associated
with a wide range of adverse health effects in children. Both lead exposure and
the early life microbiome- which plays a critical role in human development-have 
been linked to similar health outcomes, but it is unclear if the adverse effects 
of lead are partially driven by early life gut microbiota dysbiosis. The
objective of this study was to examine the association between in utero and
postnatal lead levels (measured in deciduous baby teeth) and early life bacterial
and fungal gut microbiota in the first year of life.
METHODS: Data from the Wayne County Health, Environment, Allergy and Asthma
Longitudinal Study (WHEALS) birth cohort were analyzed. Tooth lead levels during 
the 2nd and 3rd trimesters and postnatally (<1 year of age) were quantified using
high-resolution microspatial mapping of dentin growth rings. Early life
microbiota were measured in stool samples collected at approximately 1 and
6 months of age, using both 16S rRNA (bacterial) and ITS2 (fungal) sequencing. Of
the 1,258 maternal-child pairs in WHEALS, 146 had data on both tooth metals and
early life microbiome.
RESULTS: In utero tooth lead levels were significantly associated with gut fungal
community composition at 1-month of age, where higher levels of 2nd trimester
tooth lead was associated with lower abundances of Candida and Aspergillus and
higher abundances of Malassezia and Saccharomyces; 3rd trimester lead was also
associated with lower abundances of Candida. Though lead did not significantly
associate with the overall structure of the infant gut bacterial community, it
associated with the abundance of some specific bacterial taxa, including the
increased abundance of Collinsella and Bilophila and a decreased abundance of
Bacteroides taxa.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed associations between lead exposure and infant gut
microbiota could play a role in the impact of lead on childhood development.
Given the paucity of research examining these associations in humans-particularly
for fungal microbiota-further investigation is needed.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.106062 
PMID: 32871381 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

