
1. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2020 Sep 23. doi: 10.1002/jdn.10067. [Epub ahead of print]

Lead exposure results in defective behavior as well as alteration of gut
microbiota composition in flies and their offsprings.

Sun Y(1), Tang Y(1), Xu X(1), Hu K(1), Zhang Z(1), Zhang Y(1)(2), Yi Z(1), Zhu
Q(1), Xu R(1), Zhang Y(3), Liu Z(1), Liu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen-Microbiology Division, Key Laboratory of Pathogen of
Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Medical University, Center of Global Health, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Geriatric Endocrinology, The First Hospital Affiliated to
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Zhongda Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Lead (Pb) has become one of the most dangerous metals to human
health, especially to the nervous system as its persistent accumulation and high 
toxicity. However, how the gut microbiota influence the Pb-related neurotoxicity 
remains unclear. The aim of our study was to explore the link among Pb exposure, 
behavior changes and gut microbiota.
METHODS: Using Drosophila melanogaster as model, climbing assay, social
avoidance, social space and short-term memory analysis were preformed to study
the behavioral changes in flies exposed to Pb and their offspring. 16S rRNA
sequencing was used to explore the changes in the gut microbiota of the flies
with/without Pb-exposed.
RESULTS: The crawling ability, memory and social interactions of Pb-exposed
parent flies decreased significantly. For the offspring, behaviors were more
significantly affected in male offspring whose male parent was exposed to Pb. The
alpha-diversity and the beta diversity of gut microbiota were significantly
different between the Pb-exposed flies and the controls, as well as between the
male offspring and the controls. Two genera, Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium
were found significantly decreased in the Pb-exposed flies when compared to the
controls and significantly correlated with the learning and memory. Four genera, 
Bilophila, Coprococcus, Desulfovibrio and Ruminococcus were found depleted in the
female offspring of the Pb-exposed flies.
CONCLUSIONS: Lead exposure resulted in defective behavior and alteration of gut
microbiota composition in flies and their offspring, alteration in gut microbiota
might be the link between behavioral changes induced by Pb-exposed.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jdn.10067 
PMID: 32966649 

