
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 Sep 1;75(9):2411-2415. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa220.

Emergence of vancomycin- and teicoplanin-resistant Enterococcus faecium via
vanD5-harbouring large genomic island.

Sato T(1), Wada T(2), Shinagawa M(3), Fukushima Y(4), Nakajima C(4)(5), Suzuki
Y(4)(5), Takahashi S(3)(6), Yokota SI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of International Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki
University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(3)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Sapporo Medical University Hospital, Sapporo,
Japan.
(4)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University Research Center for Zoonosis
Control, Sapporo, Japan.
(5)Global Station for Zoonosis Control, Global Institution for Collaborative
Research and Education (GI-CoRE), Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
(6)Department of Infection Control and Laboratory Medicine, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Treatment of VRE is of clinical concern. While certain numbers of
vanD-type VRE have been isolated, only two vanD5-harbouring Enterococcus faecium 
isolates have been reported in Canada and Japan.
METHODS: We report the isolation of vanD5-type E. faecium and the first ever
determination of the whole-genome sequence to investigate the possible mechanisms
of the acquisition of the vanD5 gene cluster in E. faecium.
RESULTS: Two vanD5-harbouring vancomycin-resistant E. faecium were isolated from 
the skin (SMVRE19) and faeces (SMVRE20) of a patient with a skin ulcer in Japan. 
The isolates exhibited vancomycin and teicoplanin MIC values of 128 mg/L, whilst 
the previous isolates of vanD5-harbouring E. faecium were only resistant to
vancomycin. SMVRE19 and SMVRE20 were clones related to ST18, which is also seen
in vanA- and vanB-type VRE. These isolates harboured an insertion element,
ISEfm1, in the ddl gene, similar to a previously described teicoplanin-resistant 
vanD3-type E. faecium. The vanD5 gene cluster was integrated into the SMVRE20
chromosome as a part of a large genomic island (approximately 127 kb), similar to
other recently spreading vanD variants in the Netherlands. The genomic island
shared the greatest similarity with a part of the Blautia coccoides genome
sequence, except for the region surrounding the vanD gene cluster.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports that emergence of vancomycin- and
teicoplanin-resistant vanD5-type E. faecium occurred via acquisition of the vanD5
cluster and ISEfm1 insertion into ddl. Considering the genetic similarity between
the various VRE strains, the current study should serve as a warning against the 
spread of vanD5-type VRE.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa220 
PMID: 32585683 

