
1. mSystems. 2020 Mar 24;5(2). pii: e00857-19. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00857-19.

Depletion of Blautia Species in the Microbiota of Obese Children Relates to
Intestinal Inflammation and Metabolic Phenotype Worsening.

Benítez-Páez A(1), Gómez Del Pugar EM(2), López-Almela I(2), Moya-Pérez Á(2),
Codoñer-Franch P(3)(4), Sanz Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology, Nutrition, and Health Research Unit, Institute of
Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council (IATA-CSIC),
Paterna-Valencia, Spain abenitez@iata.csic.es yolsanz@iata.csic.es.
(2)Microbial Ecology, Nutrition, and Health Research Unit, Institute of
Agrochemistry and Food Technology, Spanish National Research Council (IATA-CSIC),
Paterna-Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Valencia,
Valencia, Spain.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Dr. Peset University Hospital, Valencia, Spain.

Cross-sectional studies conducted with obese and control subjects have suggested 
associations between gut microbiota alterations and obesity, but the links with
specific disease phenotypes and proofs of causality are still scarce. The present
study aimed to profile the gut microbiota of lean and obese children with and
without insulin resistance to characterize associations with specific
obesity-related complications and understand the role played in metabolic
inflammation. Through massive sequencing of 16S rRNA gene amplicons and data
analysis using a novel permutation approach, we have detected decreased incidence
of Blautia species, especially Blautia luti and B. wexlerae, in the gut
microbiota of obese children, which was even more pronounced in cases with both
obesity and insulin resistance. There was also a parallel increase in
proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines (gamma interferon [IFN-γ], tumor
necrosis factor alpha [TNF-α], and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 [MCP-1]) in
feces of obese children compared to those of lean ones. B. luti and B. wexlerae
were also shown to exert an anti-inflammatory effect in peripheral blood
mononuclear cell cultures in vitro, compared to non-obesity-associated species.
We suggest that the depletion of B. luti and B. wexlerae species in the gut
ecosystem may occur in cases of obesity and contribute to metabolic inflammation 
leading to insulin resistance.IMPORTANCE Child obesity constitutes a risk factor 
for developing insulin resistance which, if sustained, could lead to more severe 
conditions like type 2 diabetes (T2D) in adulthood. Our study identified
previously unknown species whose depletion (Blautia luti and Blautia wexlerae) is
associated with insulin resistance in obese individuals. Our results also
indicate that these bacterial species might help to reduce inflammation causally 
linked to obesity-related complications. Childhood is considered a window of
opportunity to tackle obesity. These new findings provide, therefore, valuable
information for the future design of microbiota-based strategies for the early
prevention of obesity-related complications.

Copyright © 2020 Benítez-Páez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00857-19 
PMCID: PMC7093825
PMID: 32209719 

