
1. J Comp Pathol. 2020 Apr;176:86-108. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2020.02.005. Epub 2020
Mar 17.

Aetiology of Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex and Prevalence of its 
Pathogens in Europe.

Day MJ(1), Carey S(2), Clercx C(3), Kohn B(4), MarsilIo F(5), Thiry E(3),
Freyburger L(6), Schulz B(7), Walker DJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western
Australia and Bristol Veterinary School, University of Bristol, Langford, UK.
Electronic address: profmjday@gmail.com.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Michigan State University, USA.
(3)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Liège University, Liège, Belgium.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
(6)Université de Lyon, VetAgro Sup, Agressions Pulmonaires et Circulatoires dans 
le Sepsis, Marcy l'Etoile and La Compagnie des Animaux, SantéVet, Lyon, France.
(7)Ludwig-Maximillian-University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(8)Anderson Moores Veterinary Specialists, Winchester, Hampshire, UK.

The canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC) is an endemic worldwide
syndrome involving multiple viral and bacterial pathogens. Traditionally,
Bordetella bronchiseptica (Bb), canine adenovirus type 2 (CAV-2), canine
distemper virus (CDV), canine herpesvirus (CHV) and canine parainfluenza virus
(CPiV) were considered the major causative agents. Lately, new pathogens have
been implicated in the development of CIRDC, namely canine influenza virus (CIV),
canine respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV), canine pneumovirus (CnPnV), Mycoplasma
cynos and Streptococcus equi subspecies zooepidemicus. To better understand the
role of the different pathogens in the development of CIRDC and their
epidemiological relevance in Europe, prevalence data were collected from
peer-reviewed publications and summarized. Evidence of exposure to Bb is
frequently found in healthy and diseased dogs and client-owned dogs are as likely
to be infected as kennelled dogs. Co-infections with viral pathogens are common. 
The findings confirm that Bb is an important cause of CIRDC in Europe. CAV-2 and 
CDV recovery rates from healthy and diseased dogs are low and the most likely
explanation for this is control through vaccination. Seroconversion to CHV can be
demonstrated following CIRDC outbreaks and CHV has been detected in the lower
respiratory tract of diseased dogs. There is some evidence that CHV is not a
primary cause of CIRDC, but opportunistically re-activates at the time of
infection and exacerbates the disease. The currently available data suggest that 
CIV is, at present, neither a prevalent nor a significant pathogen in Europe.
CPiV remains an important pathogen in CIRDC and facilitates co-infection with
other viral and bacterial pathogens. CnPnV and CRCoV are important new elements
in the aetiology of CIRDC and spread particularly well in multi-dog
establishments. M. cynos is common in Europe and is more likely to occur in
younger and kennelled dogs. This organism is frequently found together with other
CIRDC pathogens and is significantly associated with more severe respiratory
signs. S. zooepidemicus infection is not common and appears to be a particular
problem in kennels. Protective immunity against respiratory diseases is rarely
complete, and generally only a reduction in clinical signs and excretion of
pathogen can be achieved through vaccination. However, even vaccines that only
reduce and do not prevent infection carry epidemiological advantages. They reduce
spread, increase herd immunity and decrease usage of antimicrobials. Recommending
vaccination of dogs against pathogens of CIRDC will directly provide
epidemiological advantages to the population and the individual dog.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2020.02.005 
PMCID: PMC7103302
PMID: 32359641  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

