
1. Biomolecules. 2020 May 19;10(5). pii: E785. doi: 10.3390/biom10050785.

Green Synthesis of MnO Nanoparticles Using Abutilon indicum Leaf Extract for
Biological, Photocatalytic, and Adsorption Activities.

Khan SA(1), Shahid S(2), Shahid B(2), Fatima U(2), Abbasi SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF), Department of Chemistry, 
City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Management and Technology,
Lahore-54770, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Physics, Qatar University, Doha
2713, Qatar.

We report the synthesis of MnO nanoparticles (AI-MnO NAPs) using biological
molecules of Abutilon indicum leaf extract. Further, they were evaluated for
antibacterial and cytotoxicity activity against different pathogenic microbes
(Escherichia coli, Bordetella bronchiseptica, Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus
subtilis) and HeLa cancerous cells. Synthesized NAPs were also investigated for
photocatalytic dye degradation potential against methylene blue (MB), and
adsorption activity against Cr(VI) was also determined. Results from Scanning
electron microscope (SEM), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), Energy-dispersive
X-ray (EDX), and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) confirmed the
successful synthesis of NAPs with spherical morphology and crystalline nature.
Biological activity results demonstrated that synthesized AI-MnO NAPs exhibited
significant antibacterial and cytotoxicity propensities against pathogenic
microbes and cancerous cells, respectively, compared with plant extract.
Moreover, synthesized AI-MnO NAPs demonstrated the comparable biological
activities results to standard drugs. These excellent biological activities
results are attributed to the existence of the plant's biological molecules on
their surfaces and small particle size (synergetic effect). Synthesized NAPs
displayed better MB-photocatalyzing properties under sunlight than an ultraviolet
lamp. The Cr(VI) adsorption result showed that synthesized NAPs efficiently
adsorbed more Cr(VI) at higher acidic pH than at basic pH. Hence, the current
findings suggest that Abutilon indicum is a valuable source for tailoring the
potential of NAPs toward various enhanced biological, photocatalytic, and
adsorption activities. Consequently, the plant's biological molecule-mediated
synthesized AI-MnO NAPs could be excellent contenders for future therapeutic
applications.

DOI: 10.3390/biom10050785 
PMCID: PMC7277848
PMID: 32438654 

