
1. Zoonoses Public Health. 2020 Jul 25. doi: 10.1111/zph.12756. [Epub ahead of
print]

The occurrence of Salmonella, extended-spectrum β-lactamase producing Escherichia
coli and carbapenem resistant non-fermenting Gram-negative bacteria in a backyard
poultry flock environment.

Shah DH(1), Board MM(1), Crespo R(1), Guard J(2), Paul NC(3), Faux C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Pathology, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA, USA.
(2)US National Poultry Research Center, United States Department of Agriculture, 
Athens, GA, USA.
(3)Texas A & M Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, College Station, TX,
USA.
(4)Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience, Washington State University, Pullman,
WA, USA.

Increase in the number of small-scale backyard poultry flocks in the USA has
substantially increased human-to-live poultry contact, leading to increased
public health risks of the transmission of multi-drug resistant (MDR) zoonotic
and food-borne bacteria. The objective of this study was to detect the occurrence
of Salmonella and MDR Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) in the backyard poultry flock 
environment. A total of 34 backyard poultry flocks in Washington State (WA) were 
sampled. From each flock, one composite coop sample and three drag swabs from
nest floor, waterer-feeder, and a random site with visible faecal smearing,
respectively, were collected. The samples were processed for isolation of
Salmonella and other fermenting and non-fermenting GNB under ceftiofur selection.
Each isolate was identified to species level using MALDI-TOFF and tested for
resistance against 16 antibiotics belonging to eight antibiotic classes.
Salmonella serovar 1,4,[5],12:i:- was isolated from one (3%) out of 34 flocks.
Additionally, a total of 133 ceftiofur resistant (CefR ) GNB including
Escherichia coli (53), Acinetobacter spp. (45), Pseudomonas spp. (22),
Achromobacter spp. (8), Bordetella trematum (1), Hafnia alvei (1), Ochrobactrum
intermedium (1), Raoultella ornithinolytica (1), and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
(1) were isolated. Of these, 110 (82%) isolates displayed MDR. Each flock was
found positive for the presence of one or more CefR GNB. Several MDR E. coli
(n = 15) were identified as extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) positive.
Carbapenem resistance was detected in non-fermenting GNB including Acinetobacter 
spp. (n = 20), Pseudomonas spp. (n = 11) and Stenotrophomonas maltophila (n = 1).
ESBL positive E. coli and carbapenem resistant non-fermenting GNB are widespread 
in the backyard poultry flock environment in WA State. These GNB are known to
cause opportunistic infections, especially in immunocompromised hosts. Better
understanding of the ecology and epidemiology of these GNB in the backyard
poultry flock settings is needed to identify potential risks of transmission to
people in proximity.

© 2020 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12756 
PMID: 32710700 

