
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jun 30. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15145. [Epub ahead of
print]

Characterization of two relacidines belonging to a novel class of circular
lipopeptides that act against Gram-negative bacterial pathogens.

Li Z(1), Chakraborty P(2), de Vries RH(3), Song C(4), Zhao X(1), Roelfes G(3),
Scheffers DJ(2), Kuipers OP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, University of Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(3)Stratingh Institute for Chemistry, University of Groningen, Groningen, the
Netherlands.
(4)College of Resources and Environmental Science; National Academy of
Agriculture Green Development; Key Laboratory of Plant-Soil Interaction, Ministry
of Education, China Agricultural University, 100193, Beijing, China.

The development of sustainable agriculture and the increasing antibiotic
resistance of human pathogens call for novel antimicrobial compounds. Here, we
describe the extraction and characterization of a class of cationic circular
lipopeptides, for which we propose the name relacidines, from the soil bacterium 
Brevibacillus laterosporus MG64. Relacidines are composed of a fatty acid side
chain (4-methylhexanoic acid) and 13 amino acid residues. A lactone ring is
formed by the last five amino acid residues and three positively charged
ornithines are located in the linear fragment. Relacidines selectively combat
Gram-negative pathogens, including phytopathogens and human pathogens. Further
investigation of the mode of action revealed that relacidine B binds to the
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) but does not form pores in the cell membrane. We also
provide proof to show that relacidine B does not affect the biosynthesis of the
cell wall and RNA. Instead, it affects the oxidative phosphorylation process of
cells and diminishes the biosynthesis of ATP. Transcription of relacidines is
induced by plant pathogens, which strengthens the potential of B. laterosporus
MG64 to be used as a biocontrol agent. Thus, we identified a new group of potent 
antibiotic compounds for combating Gram-negative pathogens of plants or animals. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15145 
PMID: 32608161 

