
1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 23;14(12):e0226576. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226576.
eCollection 2019.

Kinetics of the thermal inactivation and the refolding of bacterial luciferases
in Bacillus subtilis and in Escherichia coli differ.

Gnuchikh E(1)(2), Baranova A(1)(3)(4), Schukina V(1), Khaliullin I(1),
Zavilgelsky G(2), Manukhov I(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Dolgoprudny, Moscow Region,
Russia.
(2)National Research Center, Kurchatov Institute, GOSNIIGENETIKA, Moscow, Russia.
(3)School of Systems Biology, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA, United States
of America.
(4)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia.

Here we present a study of the thermal inactivation and the refolding of the
proteins in Gram positive Bacillus subtilis. To enable use of bacterial
luciferases as the models for protein thermal inactivation and refolding in B.
subtilis cells, we developed a variety of bright luminescent B. subtilis strains 
which express luxAB genes encoding luciferases of differing thermolability. The
kinetics of the thermal inactivation and the refolding of luciferases from
Photorhabdus luminescens and Photobacterium leiognathi were compared in Gram
negative and Gram positive bacteria. In B. subtilis cells, these luciferases are 
substantially more thermostable than in Escherichia coli. Thermal inactivation of
the thermostable luciferase P. luminescens in B. subtilis at 48.5°С behaves as a 
first-order reaction. In E.coli, the first order rate constant (Kt) of the
thermal inactivation of luciferase in E. coli exceeds that observed in B.
subtilis cells 2.9 times. Incubation time dependence curves for the thermal
inactivation of the thermolabile luciferase of P. leiognathi luciferase in the
cells of E. coli and B. subtilis may be described by first and third order
kinetics, respectively. Here we shown that the levels and the rates of refolding 
of thermally inactivated luciferases in B. subtilis cells are substantially lower
that that observed in E. coli. In dnaK-negative strains of B. subtilis, both the 
rates of thermal inactivation and the efficiency of refolding are similar to that
observed in wild-type strains. These experiments point that the role that DnaKJE 
plays in thermostability of luciferases may be limited to bacterial species
resembling E. coli.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0226576 
PMCID: PMC6927610
PMID: 31869349  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

