
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jul 27;10(1):12487. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-69111-x.

Changes in the vaginal microbiota across a gradient of urbanization.

Vargas-Robles D(1)(2), Morales N(2), Rodríguez I(3), Nieves T(2), Godoy-Vitorino 
F(4), Alcaraz LD(5), Pérez ME(6), Ravel J(7), Forney LJ(8), Domínguez-Bello
MG(9)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR, USA.
(2)Servicio Autónomo Centro Amazónico de Investigación y Control de Enfermedades 
Tropicales Simón Bolívar, MPPS, Puerto Ayacucho, Venezuela.
(3)Ministerio del Poder Popular Para La Salud, Caracas, Venezuela.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Medical Zoology, School of Medicine, University
of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR, USA.
(5)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Department of Mathematics, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR, USA.
(7)Institute for Genome Sciences, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, USA.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences and the Institute for Bioinformatics and
Evolutionary Studies, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA.
mg.dominguez-bello@rutgers.edu.
(10)Departments of Biochemistry and Microbiology and of Anthropology, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, USA. mg.dominguez-bello@rutgers.edu.

The vaginal microbiota of healthy women typically has low diversity, which
increases after perturbations. Among these, lifestyle associated with
certain sexual and antimicrobial practices may be associated with higher
diversity. To test this hypothesis, we characterized the vaginal microbiota in
the cervicovaginal and introital sites in sexually active Amerindians (N = 82)
spanning urbanization, and in urban mestizos (N = 29), in the
Venezuelan Amazonas. HPV status was also considered. Sampling was performed in an
urban gradient from remote villages to a town, and women were individually
classified by the degree of urbanization (low, medium, and high). Amerindian
cervicovaginal and introital microbiota diversity were not associated with major 
changes in urbanization or ethnicity. There was a non-significant trend of
increased diversity with urbanization, with a few taxa found overrepresented in
urban Amerindians (Brevibacterium linens and Peptoniphilus lacrimalis) or
mestizos (Mobiluncus mulieris and Prevotella sp.). Among all women,
cervicovaginal and introital samples clustered, respectively, in four and two
community state types (CSTs), where most profiles were dominated by Lactobacillus
iners, Gardnerella vaginalis or were highly diverse profiles. HPV status did not 
associate with microbial diversity. In conclusion, no association was found
between urban level and the vaginal microbiome in Amerindian women, and little
difference was found between ethnicities. L. iners and high diversity profiles,
associated with vaginal health outcomes, prevail in these populations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-69111-x 
PMCID: PMC7385657
PMID: 32719372 

