
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Aug 10. doi: 10.1111/jam.14818. [Epub ahead of print]

Isolation and characterization of endophytic bacteria for controlling root rot
disease of Chinese jujube.

Wang X(1)(2), Xiao C(3), Ji C(3), Liu Z(3), Song X(3), Liu Y(3), Li C(3), Yan
D(3), Li H(3), Qin Y(4), Liu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Shandong Agricultural Universities, Taian, Shandong, 
China.
(2)Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Seaweed Fertilizers, Qingdao, China.
(3)College of Forestry, Shandong Agricultural Universities, Taian, Shandong,
China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Bioactive Seaweed Substances, Qingdao Brightmoon
Seaweed Group Co Ltd, Qingdao, China.

AIM: Fusarium oxysporum is the primary pathogen causing root rot disease that
severely affects cultivation of jujube fruit in the Xinjiang province of China.
The aim of this study was to identify endophytic bacteria in healthy jujube
organs that could effectively suppress F. oxysporum growth.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Different plant organs (leaves, twigs and roots) were
collected from healthy Chinese jujube cultivated in southern Xinjiang province of
China. The endophytic bacterium Brevibacterium halotolerans JZ7 was selected for 
its strong antagonistic activity and growth-promoting characteristics.
Gas-chromatography mass-spectrometry analysis showed that acetoin, 2,3-butanediol
and fenretinide were the three dominant volatile organic compounds produced by
strain JZ7. Fenretinide strongly suppressed spore germination of F. oxysporum in 
vitro. Pot experiments showed that strain JZ7 colonized both the roots and
rhizosphere soil of Chinese jujube and significantly reduced F. oxysporum level
in jujube rhizosphere soil.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that B. halotolerans JZ7 can be developed into a
biological control agent to combat root rot disease of Chinese jujube in the
Xinjiang province of China.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The suggested strategy for biological
control of jujube root rot disease is fully in accordance with the current
principles of sustainability.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14818 
PMID: 32777121 

