
1. Exp Dermatol. 2020 Jun 7. doi: 10.1111/exd.14126. [Epub ahead of print]

Know your enemy: Unexpected, pervasive and persistent viral and bacterial
contamination of primary cell cultures.

Niehues H(1), Jansen PAM(1), Rodijk-Olthuis D(1), Rikken G(1), Smits JPH(1),
Schalkwijk J(1), Zeeuwen PLJM(1), van den Bogaard EHJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Radboud University Medical Center (Radboudumc),
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

In biomedical research, cell culture contamination is one of the main culprits of
experimental failure. Contamination sources and concomitant remedies are numerous
and challenging to manage. We herein describe two cases of uncommon contamination
of cell cultures that we encountered, and the successful determination and
eradication strategies. The first case describes the infection with human
adenovirus C that originated from pharyngeal tonsils used for isolation of
primary tonsillar epithelial cells. It is known that viral contamination of in
vitro cell cultures can occur symptomless and is therefore difficult to identify.
The contamination was pervasive and persistent, as it was widely spread in flow
cabinets and apparatus, and has caused a serious delay to our research projects
and the inevitable loss of valuable (patient-derived) cell sources. Eradication
was successful by formalin gas sterilization of the flow cabinet and elimination 
of all infected cell lines from our biobank after PCR-guided determination.
Secondly, we encountered a spore-forming bacterium, namely Brevibacillus brevis, 
in our cell culture facility. This bacterium originated from contaminated tap
water pipes and spread via regular aseptic culture techniques due to survival of 
the bacterial spores in 70% ethanol. B brevis overgrew the cultures within a few 
days after seeding of the primary cells. Chlorine solution effectively killed
this spore-forming bacterium. Both cases of contamination were identified using
DNA sequencing which enabled the deployment of targeted aseptic techniques for
the elimination of the persistent contamination.

© 2020 The Authors. Experimental Dermatology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14126 
PMCID: PMC7496648
PMID: 32506526 

