
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Sep 14;21(1):631. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-07041-8.

Benchmarking hybrid assembly approaches for genomic analyses of bacterial
pathogens using Illumina and Oxford Nanopore sequencing.

Chen Z(1), Erickson DL(1), Meng J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Food Safety 
and Security Systems, and Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA.
(2)Joint Institute for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, Center for Food Safety 
and Security Systems, and Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of
Maryland, College Park, MD, 20742, USA. jmeng@umd.edu.

BACKGROUND: We benchmarked the hybrid assembly approaches of MaSuRCA, SPAdes, and
Unicycler for bacterial pathogens using Illumina and Oxford Nanopore sequencing
by determining genome completeness and accuracy, antimicrobial resistance (AMR), 
virulence potential, multilocus sequence typing (MLST), phylogeny, and pan
genome. Ten bacterial species (10 strains) were tested for simulated reads of
both mediocre- and low-quality, whereas 11 bacterial species (12 strains) were
tested for real reads.
RESULTS: Unicycler performed the best for achieving contiguous genomes, closely
followed by MaSuRCA, while all SPAdes assemblies were incomplete. MaSuRCA was
less tolerant of low-quality long reads than SPAdes and Unicycler. The hybrid
assemblies of five antimicrobial-resistant strains with simulated reads provided 
consistent AMR genotypes with the reference genomes. The MaSuRCA assembly of
Staphylococcus aureus with real reads contained msr(A) and tet(K), while the
reference genome and SPAdes and Unicycler assemblies harbored blaZ. The AMR
genotypes of the reference genomes and hybrid assemblies were consistent for the 
other five antimicrobial-resistant strains with real reads. The numbers of
virulence genes in all hybrid assemblies were similar to those of the reference
genomes, irrespective of simulated or real reads. Only one exception existed that
the reference genome and hybrid assemblies of Pseudomonas aeruginosa with
mediocre-quality long reads carried 241 virulence genes, whereas 184 virulence
genes were identified in the hybrid assemblies of low-quality long reads. The
MaSuRCA assemblies of Escherichia coli O157:H7 and Salmonella Typhimurium with
mediocre-quality long reads contained 126 and 118 virulence genes, respectively, 
while 110 and 107 virulence genes were detected in their MaSuRCA assemblies of
low-quality long reads, respectively. All approaches performed well in our MLST
and phylogenetic analyses. The pan genomes of the hybrid assemblies of S.
Typhimurium with mediocre-quality long reads were similar to that of the
reference genome, while SPAdes and Unicycler were more tolerant of low-quality
long reads than MaSuRCA for the pan-genome analysis. All approaches functioned
well in the pan-genome analysis of Campylobacter jejuni with real reads.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research demonstrates the hybrid assembly pipeline of Unicycler 
as a superior approach for genomic analyses of bacterial pathogens using Illumina
and Oxford Nanopore sequencing.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-07041-8 
PMCID: PMC7490894
PMID: 32928108 

