
1. J Periodontal Res. 2020 Apr;55(2):238-246. doi: 10.1111/jre.12708. Epub 2019 Nov 
2.

Pyrosequencing of the subgingival microbiome in peri-implantitis after
non-surgical mechanical debridement therapy.

Nie J(1), Zhang Q(2), Zheng H(3), Xu LX(4), Wang XY(1), Chen F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cariology and Endodontology, Peking University School and
Hospital of Stomatology, Beijing, China.
(2)Central Laboratory, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology,
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Orthodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, China.
(4)The Third Dental Center, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Peri-implantitis remains a challenge for dental
implant therapy, and the prognosis of non-surgical therapy for peri-implantitis
is unsatisfactory. In order to reveal the impact of non-surgical mechanical
debridement therapy on microbial communities, we investigated the subgingival
microbial communities of healthy implants and implants with peri-implantitis,
both before and after the therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Subgingival plaques were collected from patients with
healthy dental implants (HC; n = 10) and from patients with peri-implantitis
(n = 13) before and after non-surgical mechanical debridement therapy. The
treatment was conducted using curettes for submucosal debridement followed by
irrigation with 0.2% (w/v) chlorhexidine, with re-examination 1 month later. 16S 
rRNA pyrosequencing was used to analyze the subgingival microbiome, and
co-occurrence networks were adopted to explore the interactions between pathogens
in the microbial communities.
RESULTS: A total of 506 955 high-quality reads were generated, and 2222
operational taxonomic units were finally detected using a 97% similarity cutoff, 
with a mean of 249 ± 69 per sample. The peri-implantitis sites harbored similar
microbial communities before and after the treatment, as demonstrated by the
microbial diversity, relative abundance, and prevalence of bacteria. Most
importantly, the microbial community structures were stable before and after
non-surgical therapy based on the microbial diversity and bacterial composition, 
as well as the interactions between key pathogens, including Enterobacteriaceae, 
Selenomonas sputigena, Parvimonas, Eubacterium infirmum, Campylobacter gracilis, 
Tannerella forsythia, and Fusobacterium, which were measured using a
co-occurrence network analysis. Periodontal pathogens were also detected in
subgingival plaque after the treatment. Distinct microbial communities were found
between the healthy and peri-implantitis sites.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that non-surgical mechanical debridement
therapy did not significantly affect the subgingival microbial communities in
peri-implantitis, and the stable microbial networks created via interactions
among pathogens may be responsible for the poor prognosis of peri-implantitis
treatment.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12708 
PMID: 31677272  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

