
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 Sep 8. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0082. [Epub ahead of print]

Antimicrobial Resistance of Campylobacter spp. Causing Human Infection in
Australia: An International Comparison.

Wallace RL(1), Bulach D(2)(3), McLure A(1), Varrone L(4), Jennison AV(5),
Valcanis M(3), Smith JJ(6), Polkinghorne BG(1), Glass K(1), Kirk MD(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, The Australian
National University, Canberra, Australia.
(2)Melbourne Bioinformatics, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Microbiological Diagnostic Unit Public Health Laboratory, The Peter Doherty
Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(5)Forensic and Scientific Services, Queensland Health, Brisbane, Australia.
(6)Food Safety Standards and Regulation, Health Protection Branch, Queensland
Health, Brisbane, Australia.

The study investigates the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance in
Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli in gastroenteritis patients in the
eight most populous regions in Australia and compares the prevalence of
antimicrobial resistance in Europe and North America. A total of 164
Campylobacter isolates were collected from patients with campylobacteriosis and
tested for susceptibility to six antimicrobials using ETEST® strips and compared 
with reports from Europe and the United States. Genomes were sequenced on
Illumina NextSeq to identify genetic determinants of resistance. Phenotypically, 
1.8%, 14.0%, 14.6%, and 20.1% of isolates were resistant to erythromycin (ERY),
ampicillin, tetracycline (TET), and ciprofloxacin (CIP), respectively. Comparing 
published phenotypic results of antimicrobial resistance in several European
countries and the United States with these Australian isolates reveals that rates
observed in Australia are among the lowest observed for ERY, CIP, and TET for
both C. coli and C. jejuni. For each antimicrobial tested, concordance between
resistance phenotype and genotype ranged from 66.6% to 100.0%. This study
highlights that, among industrialized countries, Portugal and Spain have very
high levels of antimicrobial resistance in C. jejuni and C. coli, especially when
compared with the United Kingdom, United States, and Australia.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0082 
PMID: 32898460 

