
1. J Investig Clin Dent. 2019 Nov;10(4):e12439. doi: 10.1111/jicd.12439. Epub 2019
Jul 17.

Microbiota of periodontal pockets and root canals in induced experimental
periodontal disease in dogs.

Gadê-Neto CR(1)(2), Rodrigues RR(1), Louzada LM(1), Arruda-Vasconcelos R(1),
Teixeira FB(3), Viana Casarin RC(4), Gomes BPFA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Endodontics, Piracicaba
Dental School, State University of Campinas - UNICAMP, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(2)Division of Endodontics, Potiguar University - UnP, Natal, RN, Brazil.
(3)Department of Endodontics, College of Dentistry and Dental Clinics, University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(4)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontics, School of Dentistry at
Piracicaba, University of Campinas, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.

AIM: To investigate the relationship between the microbiota of periodontal
pockets (PP) and root canals (RC) in dogs submitted to experimental periodontal
disease (ExPD).
METHODS: ExPD was induced by combining cotton and wire ligatures. After 125 days,
microbiological samples were collected from PP and RC. Strains isolated from 19
teeth were submitted to DNA extraction, 16S rRNA gene amplification and gene
sequencing. Pearson's χ2 - and Fisher's exact tests and McNemar's test were used 
when appropriate.
RESULTS: The number of species in PP was greater than in RC, with prevalence of
obligate anaerobes and Gram-negative bacteria. In the PP predominated
Fusobacterium necrophorum, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella loescheii,
Campylobacter gracilis and Veillonella parvula. In the RC samples, 9 had
microbial growth, with predominance of the following genera: Staphylococcus,
Streptococcus and Neisseria. Eight genera were common to both sites in the same
tooth. PP presented a greater number of species than the RC. No significant
difference was observed in the species found in PP and RC in the same tooth.
CONCLUSION: Microbial composition of the RC could be modulated by the presence of
periodontal disease, especially in cases of severe periodontal destruction. RC
microbiota was less complex and diverse than the PP.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jicd.12439 
PMID: 31313892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

