
1. Vaccines (Basel). 2020 Sep 11;8(3). pii: E520. doi: 10.3390/vaccines8030520.

Evaluation of Glycosylated FlpA and SodB as Subunit Vaccines Against
Campylobacter jejuni Colonisation in Chickens.

Vohra P(1)(2), Chintoan-Uta C(1), Terra VS(3), Bremner A(1), Cuccui J(3), Wren
BW(3), Vervelde L(1), Stevens MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH25 9RG, UK.
(2)Institute for Immunology and Infection Research, School of Biological
Sciences, Charlotte Auerbach Road, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FL,
UK.
(3)Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, London WC1E 7HT, UK.

Campylobacter jejuni is the leading bacterial cause of human gastroenteritis
worldwide and the handling or consumption of contaminated poultry meat is the key
source of infection. C. jejuni proteins FlpA and SodB and glycoconjugates
containing the C. jejuni N-glycan have been separately reported to be partially
protective vaccines in chickens. In this study, two novel glycoproteins generated
by protein glycan coupling technology-G-FlpA and G-SodB (with two and three
N-glycosylation sites, respectively)-were evaluated for efficacy against
intestinal colonisation of chickens by C. jejuni strain M1 relative to their
unglycosylated variants. Two independent trials of the same design were performed
with either a high challenge dose of 107 colony-forming units (CFU) or a minimum 
challenge dose of 102 CFU of C. jejuni M1. While antigen-specific serum IgY was
detected in both trials, no reduction in caecal colonisation by C. jejuni M1 was 
observed and glycosylation of vaccine antigens had no effect on the outcome. Our 
data highlight inconsistencies in the outcome of C. jejuni vaccination trials
that may reflect antigen-, challenge strain-, vaccine administration-, adjuvant- 
and chicken line-specific differences from previously published studies.
Refinement of glycoconjugate vaccines by increasing glycosylation levels or using
highly immunogenic protein carriers could improve their efficacy.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines8030520 
PMID: 32932979 

