
1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2020 Sep 21. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-0053. [Epub ahead of print]

A Multisite Network Assessment of the Epidemiology and Etiology of Acquired
Diarrhea among U.S. Military and Western Travelers (Global Travelers' Diarrhea
Study): A Principal Role of Norovirus among Travelers with Gastrointestinal
Illness.

Ashbaugh HR(1), Early JM(2), Johnson ME(2), Simons MP(3), Graf PC(4), Riddle
MS(5), Swierczewski BE(6), For Gtd Study Team.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Directorate, Armed Forces Health Surveillance Division, Global
Emerging Infections Surveillance, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(2)General Dynamics Information Technology, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(3)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland.
(4)Naval Health Research Center, San Diego, California.
(5)University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada.
(6)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland.

The U.S. military personnel must be ready to deploy to locations worldwide,
including environments with heightened risk of infectious disease. Diarrheal
illnesses continue to be among the most significant infectious disease threats to
operational capability. To better prevent, detect, and respond to infectious
disease threats and improve synchronization across the Department of Defense
(DoD) overseas laboratory network, a multisite Global Travelers' Diarrhea
protocol was implemented with standardized case definitions and harmonized
laboratory methods to identify enteric pathogens. Harmonized laboratory
procedures for detection of Norovirus (NoV), enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(ETEC), enteroaggregative E. coli, Shiga toxin-producing E. coli,
enteropathogenic E. coli, Salmonella enterica, Shigella/enteroinvasive E. coli,
and Campylobacter jejuni have been implemented for six DoD laboratories with
surveillance sites in Egypt, Honduras, Peru, Nepal, Thailand, and Kenya. Samples 
from individuals traveling from wealthy to poorer countries were collected
between June 2012 and May 2018, and of samples with all variables of interest
available (n = 410), most participants enrolled were students (46%), tourists
(26%), U.S. military personnel (13%), or other unspecified travelers (11%). One
or more pathogens were detected in 59% of samples tested. Of samples tested, the 
most commonly detected pathogens were NoV (24%), ETEC (16%), and C. jejuni (14%),
suggesting that NoV plays a larger role in travelers' diarrhea than has
previously been described. Harmonized data collection and methods will ensure
identification and characterization of enteric pathogens are consistent across
the DoD laboratory network, ultimately resulting in more comparable data for
global assessments, preventive measures, and treatment recommendations.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-0053 
PMID: 32959765 

