
1. Electrodiagnostic Evaluation Of Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy.

Huynh R(1), Rocha Cabrero F(2).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020-.
2020 Sep 15.

Author information: 
(1)Nassau University Medical Center
(2)University of Miami/Jackson Memorial Hospital

Demyelinating neuropathies can classify as hereditary, toxic, and
immune-mediated. Immune-mediated polyneuropathies can be further classified in
acute and chronic, depending on the onset. Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is a
syndrome with several variants, with acute inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy (AIDP), being the most common type of inflammatory neuropathy in
North America. The pathophysiology of GBS and its variants appear to be secondary
to an inflammatory process leading to molecular mimicry between central and
peripheral nervous structural components and microbial/viral antigens. This
condition leads to a lack of self-tolerance from the adaptive immune system and
activation of neuroinflammatory processes affecting nerve conduction. The
microbial and viral antigens may include Campylobacter jejuni, HIV infection,
Epstein-Barr (mononucleosis), and Zika virus.[1] Previously, AIDP some speculated
to have links with vaccinations; however, further research has refuted this
association. Clinically, AIDP presents with an acute, symmetric, flaccid, and
distal weakness that usually starts in the lower extremities and has an ascending
pattern as time progresses.[2] The neurological examination may show facial
paresis, cranial nerve/bulbar weakness, distal hyporeflexia without signs of
upper motor neuron dysfunction, preserved muscle bulk, dysesthesias, allodynia,
or neuropathic pain, and loss of light and vibratory sensation in the
affected extremities. Motor symptoms and signs tend to predominate over sensory
ones. Autonomic symptoms may be present such as hypertension or hypotension,
cardiac arrhythmias, and respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation.
The latter can present in those with an advanced and severe disease course. It
has a monophasic course with varying degrees of onset, progression, and recovery.
Imaging may show hyperintense and hypertrophic nerves, especially in caudal nerve
roots in the lumbar spine. Further evaluation includes a lumbar puncture, which
often shows albuminocytologic dissociation (0 cells and high cerebrospinal
(CSF) protein without signs of infection), although a fair percentage of patients
may not have positive CSF findings until three weeks into the disease course. A
smaller percentage of patients may have unremarkable CSF results. In summary, the
diagnosis of AIDP requires a thorough history and physical exam, screening of
risk factors, lumbar spine imaging, comprehensive CSF studies to discard
alternate diagnoses, and ancillary electrodiagnostic studies.[3]
Electrodiagnostic studies can support the diagnosis and serve for prognostication
of the patient's course when an AIDP is suspected. They can help localize a
lesion (e.g., bulbar, peripheral, neuromuscular junction, muscle), and discern
the extent of the pathology and etiology (e.g., autoimmune, axonal, myopathic,
etc.). They are thought of as an extension of the neurological exam, providing
valuable information about the nerve conduction, muscle-nerve connections, and
structural integrity of the myelinated sensory and motor fibers. In more severe
cases, AIDP can affect axons, which may have a worse prognosis. This article will
focus on the findings that are typical of acute demyelinating polyneuropathies. 

PMID: 32965888 

