
1. Pathogens. 2020 Sep 30;9(10). pii: E805. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9100805.

Pituitary Adenylate Cyclase-Activating Polypeptide Alleviates Intestinal,
Extra-Intestinal and Systemic Inflammatory Responses during Acute Campylobacter
jejuni-induced Enterocolitis in Mice.

Heimesaat MM(1), Mousavi S(1), Kløve S(1), Genger C(1), Weschka D(1), Tamas A(2),
Reglodi D(2), Bereswill S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Charité-University Medicine Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, 12203 Berlin,
Germany.
(2)Department of Anatomy, MTA-PTE PACAP Research Team, Centre for Neuroscience,
University of Pecs Medical School, 7691 Pecs, Hungary.

Human Campylobacter jejuni infections are emerging, and constitute a significant 
health burden worldwide. The ubiquitously expressed pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) is well-known for its cell-protective and 
immunomodulatory effects. In our actual intervention study, we used an acute
campylobacteriosis model and assessed the potential disease-alleviating effects
of exogenous PACAP. Therefore, secondary abiotic IL-10-/- mice were perorally
infected with C. jejuni and treated with synthetic PACAP38 intraperitoneally from
day 2 until day 5 post-infection. Whereas PACAP did not interfere with the
gastrointestinal colonization of the pathogen, mice from the PACAP group
exhibited less severe clinical signs of C. jejuni-induced disease, as compared to
mock controls, which were paralleled by alleviated apoptotic, but enhanced cell
proliferative responses in colonic epithelia on day 6 post-infection.
Furthermore, PACAP dampened the accumulation of macrophages and monocytes, but
enhanced regulatory T cell responses in the colon, which were accompanied by less
IFN-γ secretion in intestinal compartments in PACAP versus mock-treated mice.
Remarkably, the inflammation-dampening properties of PACAP could also be observed
in extra-intestinal organs, and strikingly, even the systemic circulation on day 
6 post-infection. For the first time, we provide evidence that synthetic PACAP
might be a promising candidate to combat acute campylobacteriosis and
post-infectious sequelae.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9100805 
PMID: 33007819 

