
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2020 Aug 10. doi: 10.1007/s00784-020-03456-5. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Subgingival microflora in adolescent females with polycystic ovary syndrome and
its association with oral hygiene, gingivitis, and selected metabolic and
hormonal parameters.

Wendland N(1), Opydo-Szymaczek J(2), Mizgier M(3), Jarząbek-Bielecka G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Chair of Pediatric Dentistry, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, 70 Bukowska Street, 60-812, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Chair of Pediatric Dentistry, Poznan
University of Medical Sciences, 70 Bukowska Street, 60-812, Poznan, Poland.
jopydo@ump.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Dietetics, Faculty of Physical Culture in Gorzow Wielkopolski,
Poznan University of Physical Education, 4-6 Orląt Lwowskich Street, 66-400,
Gorzów Wielkopolski, Poland.
(4)Department of Perinatology and Gynecology, Division of Developmental
Gynecology and Sexology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 22 Polna Street, 
60-535, Poznan, Poland.

OBJECTIVES: Research studies suggest that polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) may
influence the composition of the oral microflora in women. This study aimed to
investigate factors affecting the number of selected periopathogens in a young
cohort of females with PCOS and to assess the association between oral hygiene,
subgingival microbiome, gingival health, and metabolic and hormonal parameters.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-two subjects with PCOS and twenty-three healthy
controls aged 15-19 years were examined periodontally by a calibrated dentist. A 
real-time PCR method was used for the identification of 9 subgingival
microorganisms. Subjects with PCOS underwent blood tests for determination of
FSH, LH, total testosterone, DHEA-S, estradiol, SHBG, fasting glucose, fasting
insulin, and lipid profile.
RESULTS: Gingival index (GI), the proportion of bleeding sites (BOP%), probing
depth (PD), and plaque index (PLI) did not differ significantly between cases and
healthy age-mates. The control group had significantly higher levels of
Peptostreptococcus micros and substantially greater percentage of subjects
infected by Treponema denticola. Capnocytophaga gingivalis count was positively
correlated with the level of estradiol, while the concentration of HDL-C was
negatively correlated with the number of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
and orange complex bacteria.
CONCLUSIONS: PCOS in young patients was not associated with higher pathogenicity 
of subgingival biofilms.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Further studies are needed to explain the relationship
between hormonal and metabolic abnormalities, subgingival microflora, and
periodontal health in patients with PCOS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-020-03456-5 
PMID: 32779013 

