
1. J Med Food. 2020 Apr 23. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2019.0273. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of the Antimicrobial Activity of Hibiscus sabdariffa Calyx Extracts,
Six Commercial Types of Mouthwashes, and Chlorhexidine on Oral Pathogenic
Bacteria, and the Effect of Hibiscus sabdariffa Extracts and Chlorhexidine on
Permeability of the Bacterial Membrane.

Baena-Santillán ES(1)(2), Piloni-Martini J(1), Santos-López EM(2), Gómez-Aldapa
CA(2), Rangel-Vargas E(2), Castro-Rosas J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Veterinary Area, Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Autonomous
University of the Hidalgo State, Tulancingo, Hgo., Mexico.
(2)Academic Area of Chemistry, Institute of Basic Sciences and Engineering, City 
of Knowledge, Autonomous University of the Hidalgo State, Mineral de la Reforma, 
Hgo., Mexico.

To determine and compare the antimicrobial effect of Hibiscus sabdariffa calyx
extracts, six types of commercial mouthwashes, and chlorhexidine on Streptococcus
mutans, Streptococcus sanguinis, Capnocytophaga gingivalis, and Staphylococcus
aureus. Two varieties of H. sabdariffa cultivated in Mexico were used. Aqueous,
methanolic, ethanolic, acetonic, and ethyl acetate extracts were obtained from H.
sabdariffa calyces. Six different types of mouthwash (Astringosol®, Colgate
plax-ice-infinity®, Crest pro-health®, Dental max®, Equate®, and Listerine zero®)
and chlorhexidine (0.12%) were purchased at a pharmacy. The antimicrobial
activity of the H. sabdariffa calyx extracts, mouthwashes, and chlorhexidine was 
determined by the agar disc diffusion technique. The minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) and the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of all
solutions were determined by the broth dilution method and the pour plate
technique, respectively. Also, the effect of H. sabdariffa extracts and
chlorhexidine on permeability of the bacterial membrane was determined by the
violet crystal assay. All H. sabdariffa calyx extracts and chlorhexidine showed
antibacterial activity against all oral pathogenic bacteria. The mouthwashes
showed lower antibacterial effect than H. sabdariffa extracts and chlorhexidine. 
Dental max showed no antibacterial effect. The MICs and MBCs, respectively, for
H. sabdariffa extracts were between 5-20 and 10-20 mg/mL; and for chlorhexidine, 
between 3-4 and 3-5 mg/mL. For the Listerine®, the MIC and MBC values were
between 20-25 and 25-33 mg/mL, respectively. The results of the crystal violet
test indicate that H. sabdariffa calyx extracts and chlorhexidine alter the
permeability of the bacterial membrane. All H. sabdariffa extracts and
chlorhexidine showed significantly greater antimicrobial effect than mouthwashes.
This is the first report in which the antimicrobial effect of the H. sabdariffa
calyx extracts, mouthwashes, and chlorhexidine is compared.

DOI: 10.1089/jmf.2019.0273 
PMID: 32326807 

