
1. J Fish Dis. 2020 Jul 6. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13208. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide comparison of Carnobacterium maltaromaticum derived from diseased
fish harbouring important virulence-related genes.

Roh H(1), Kim BS(2), Lee MK(3), Park CI(4), Kim DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquatic life medicine. College of Fisheries Science, Pukyong
National University, Busan, Korea.
(2)Aquatic disease control division, National Institute of Fisheries Science
(NIFS), Busan, Korea.
(3)Korean Aquatic Organism Disease Inspector Association, Busan, Korea.
(4)Department of Marine Biology & Aquaculture, College of Marine Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Tongyeong, Korea.

Although Carnobacterium maltaromaticum has been used as a probiotic in fish, it
was reported to cause disease for the first time in Korea. The objective of this 
study was to understand the differences between pathogenic and non-pathogenic
strains. Pathogenicity was tested by challenging rainbow trout with C.
maltaromaticum ATCC35586 and 18ISCm isolated from diseased fish, and DSM20342
isolated from a dairy product. We also compared 24 genomes of C. maltaromaticum
strains plus the genome of our isolate 18ISCm sequenced in this study. Only the
strains from diseased fish caused high mortality with severe histopathological
changes. Although all strains shared more than 90% of Ko_id, wecC and xtmA were
found only in strains from diseased fish. Interestingly, only strains from
diseased fish harboured two wecC paralogs involved in the production of
D-mannosaminuronic acid which is a major component of a well-known virulence
factor, teichuronic acid. Two wecC paralogs of 18ISCm were increased when they
were co-cultured with trout blood cells, suggesting that wecC genes might play a 
role in virulence. The results of this study show that strains isolated from
diseased fish are different from strains derived from food in terms of
pathogenicity to fish and the presence of virulence-related genes.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13208 
PMID: 32627213 

