
1. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2019 Nov;103(6):1785-1791. doi:
10.1111/jpn.13182. Epub 2019 Sep 25.

Microstructure of the small intestine in broiler chickens fed a diet with
probiotic or synbiotic supplementation.

Bogucka J(1), Ribeiro DM(2)(3), Bogusławska-Tryk M(1), Dankowiakowska A(1), da
Costa RPR(2)(4), Bednarczyk M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, Physiotherapy and Nutrition, UTP University
of Science and Technology in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Polytechnic Institute of Coimbra, Agricultural College of Coimbra, Coimbra,
Portugal.
(3)LEAF Linking Landscape, Environment, Agriculture and Food, Instituto Superior 
de Agronomia, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal.
(4)CERNAS - Research Centre for Natural Resources, Environment and Society,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(5)Department of Animal Biotechnology and Genetic, UTP University of Science and 
Technology in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland.

The aim of the study was to determine the effect of dietary supplementation of a 
probiotic and a synbiotic on the morphometric parameters of the small intestine
of broiler chickens. The experiment was conducted on three hundred sixty,
one-day-old female Ross 308 chicks, which were randomly selected from 20,000
birds and divided into three treatment groups (n = 120) with ten replicates per
treatment. The control group (C) was fed a commercial diet, the probiotic group
(PRO) was fed the same diet with an added 1% of the probiotic Lavipan®
(Lactococcus lactis, Carnobacterium divergens, Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus
plantarum and Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and the synbiotic group (SYN) was fed
the commercial diet with an added synbiotic: 0.8% of the prebiotic RFO (extracted
from lupin seeds) and 1% Lavipan®. According to the manufacturer's data, apart
from the typical probiotic action,microorganisms contained in the preparation
release anti-bacterial substances (hydrogen peroxide and bacteriocins) and,
therefore, are antagonistic towards pathogenic bacteria present in the gut of
animals. Supplementation took place in the first seven days of rearing, and all
birds had ad libitum access to water and feed during the 42 days of the
experiment. On the last day, all birds were slaughtered and samples from three
segments of the small intestine were taken. Villi area, height, width and crypt
depth ratios were read using Multiscan software. Synbiotic supplementation
increased the BWG of broilers from first to tenth day of rearing, compared to the
control group. The PRO group had improved villi morphometric parameters of the
duodenum. In the jejunum and ileum, both bioactive substances improved villus
width and villus surface area. Crypts were deeper in the small intestine of birds
supplemented with bioactive substances, which allows greater renewal of the
villi. As expected, the intestinal morphometric parameters of broiler chickens
benefited from bioactive substance supplementation.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/jpn.13182 
PMID: 31553085  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

