
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2019 Oct 1;85(20). pii: e01227-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01227-19. Print 2019 Oct 15.

Complementary Antibacterial Effects of Bacteriocins and Organic Acids as Revealed
by Comparative Analysis of Carnobacterium spp. from Meat.

Zhang P(1), Gänzle M(2)(3), Yang X(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Lacombe, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Food, and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(3)College of Bioengineering and Food Science, Hubei University of Technology,
Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Lacombe, Alberta, Canada
xianqin.yang@canada.ca.

Carnobacterium maltaromaticum and Carnobacterium divergens are often predominant 
in the microbiota of vacuum-packaged (VP) meats after prolonged storage at
chiller temperatures, and more so in recent studies. We investigated the
antibacterial activities of C. maltaromaticum and C. divergens (n = 31) from VP
meats by phenotypic characterization and genomic analysis. Five strains showed
antibacterial activities against Gram-positive bacteria in a spot-lawn assay,
with C. maltaromaticum strains having an intergeneric and C. divergens strains an
intrageneric inhibition spectrum. This inhibitory activity is correlated with the
production of predicted bacteriocins, including carnobacteriocin B2 and
carnolysin for C. maltaromaticum and divergicin A for C. divergens The
supernatants of both species cultured in meat juice medium under anaerobic
conditions retarded the growth of most Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
in broth assay in a strain-dependent manner. C. maltaromaticum and C. divergens
produced formate and acetate but not lactate under VP meat-relevant conditions.
The relative inhibitory activity by Carnobacterium strains was significantly
correlated (P < 0.05) to the production of both acids. Genomic analysis revealed 
the presence of genes required for respiration in both species. In addition, two 
clusters of C. divergens have an average nucleotide identity below the cutoff
value for species delineation and thus should be considered to be two subspecies.
In conclusion, both bacteriocins and organic acids are factors contributing
significantly to the antibacterial activity of C. maltaromaticum and C. divergens
under VP meat-relevant conditions. A few Carnobacterium strains can be explored
as protective cultures to extend the shelf life and improve the safety of VP
meats.IMPORTANCE The results of this study demonstrated that both bacteriocins
and organic acids are important factors contributing to the antibacterial
activities of Carnobacterium from vacuum-packaged (VP) meats. This study
demonstrated that formate and acetate are the key organic acids produced by
Carnobacterium and demonstrated their association with the inhibitory activity of
carnobacteria under VP meat-relevant storage conditions. The role of lactate, on 
the other hand, may not be as important as previously believed in the
antimicrobial activities of Carnobacterium spp. on chilled VP meats. These
findings advance our understanding of the physiology of Carnobacterium spp. to
better explore their biopreservative properties for chilled VP meats.

© Crown copyright 2019.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01227-19 
PMCID: PMC6805084
PMID: 31399404  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

