
1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2019 Dec 2;13(12):e0007883. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0007883. eCollection 2019 Dec.

CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene deletion of the ompA gene in symbiotic Cedecea neteri
impairs biofilm formation and reduces gut colonization of Aedes aegypti
mosquitoes.

Hegde S(1), Nilyanimit P(2), Kozlova E(3), Anderson ER(1), Narra HP(3), Sahni
SK(3), Heinz E(4), Hughes GL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Vector Biology and Tropical Disease Biology, Liverpool School
of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(2)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America.
(4)Department of Vector Biology and Department of Clinical Sciences, Liverpool
School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Symbiotic bacteria are pervasive in mosquitoes and their presence can
influence many host phenotypes that affect vectoral capacity. While it is evident
that environmental and host genetic factors contribute in shaping the microbiome 
of mosquitoes, we have a poor understanding regarding how bacterial genetics
affects colonization of the mosquito gut. The CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing system is 
a powerful tool to alter bacterial genomes facilitating investigations into
host-microbe interactions but has yet to be applied to insect symbionts.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To investigate the role of bacterial genetic
factors in mosquito biology and in colonization of mosquitoes we used CRISPR/Cas9
gene editing system to mutate the outer membrane protein A (ompA) gene of a
Cedecea neteri symbiont isolated from Aedes mosquitoes. The ompA mutant had an
impaired ability to form biofilms and poorly infected Ae. aegypti when reared in 
a mono-association under gnotobiotic conditions. In adult mosquitoes, the mutant 
had a significantly reduced infection prevalence compared to the wild type or
complement strains, while no differences in prevalence were seen in larvae,
suggesting genetic factors are particularly important for adult gut colonization.
We also used the CRISPR/Cas9 system to integrate genes (antibiotic resistance and
fluorescent markers) into the symbionts genome and demonstrated that these genes 
were functional in vitro and in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results shed insights into the role of ompA gene in
host-microbe interactions in Ae. aegypti and confirm that CRISPR/Cas9 gene
editing can be employed for genetic manipulation of non-model gut microbes. The
ability to use this technology for site-specific integration of genes into the
symbiont will facilitate the development of paratransgenic control strategies to 
interfere with arboviral pathogens such Chikungunya, dengue, Zika and Yellow
fever viruses transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0007883 
PMCID: PMC6907859
PMID: 31790395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

