
1. Access Microbiol. 2019 Oct 21;1(10):e000068. doi: 10.1099/acmi.0.000068.
eCollection 2019.

Cellulosimicrobium cellulans aortic prosthetic valve endocarditis.

Monticelli J(1), Gerloni R(2), Farina C(3), Knezevich A(4), Dore F(5), Luzzati
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)SC Malattie Infettive, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.
(2)SC Medicina d'Urgenza, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.
(3)UOC Microbiologia e Virologia, ASST 'Papa Giovanni XXIII', Bergamo, Italy.
(4)SC Laboratorio Analisi, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Trieste, 
Trieste, Italy.
(5)SC Medicina Nucleare, Azienda Sanitaria Universitaria Integrata di Trieste,
Trieste, Italy.

Introduction: Invasive infections due to Cellulosimicrobium spp. (a Gram-positive
coryneform) are extremely rare. Only a few cases of bloodstream infections and
endocarditis have been described, as bacteraemia due to coryneforms is usually
discarded as blood culture contamination.
Case presentation: A 66-year-old female, with a history of aortic valve
replacement, presented with fever, left leg purpura and acute kidney injury.
Multiple repeated blood cultures were positive for Cellulosimicrobium cellulans ,
and targeted therapy was started. At first, endocarditis was excluded by
echocardiograms, and the acute nephritis was interpreted as an atypical
presentation of Henoch-Shönlein purpura. High-dose prednisone was started, and
after 10 weeks the patient presented again with fever, mental confusion and acute
left arm ischaemia. A subsequent echocardiogram and radiolabelled leukocyte
scintigraphic evaluation revealed aortic prosthetic valve endocarditis with
periprosthetic abscess and arterial brachial thrombosis. The patient deceased,
and the autoptic examination confirmed an aortic valve periprosthetic abscess and
revealed multiple arterial thromboses and septic embolisms in the kidneys, brain,
spleen and myocardium.
Conclusion: Isolation of coryneform bacteria on blood culture should not always
be discarded as blood culture contamination. In the case of endocarditis due to
Cellulosimicrobium spp., the removal of any prosthetic material, along with
prolonged in vitro active antimicrobial therapy, should be pursued in order to
reduce persistence or relapses of infection.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/acmi.0.000068 
PMCID: PMC7491936
PMID: 32974502 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts
of interest.

