
1. mBio. 2020 Feb 4;11(1). pii: e03235-19. doi: 10.1128/mBio.03235-19.

Syntrophy via Interspecies H2 Transfer between Christensenella and
Methanobrevibacter Underlies Their Global Cooccurrence in the Human Gut.

Ruaud A(#)(1), Esquivel-Elizondo S(#)(1)(2), de la Cuesta-Zuluaga J(1), Waters
JL(1), Angenent LT(2), Youngblut ND(1), Ley RE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Center for Applied Geosciences, Eberhard-Karls-Universität Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(3)Department of Microbiome Science, Max Planck Institute for Developmental
Biology, Tübingen, Germany rley@tuebingen.mpg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Across human populations, 16S rRNA gene-based surveys of gut microbiomes have
revealed that the bacterial family Christensenellaceae and the archaeal family
Methanobacteriaceae cooccur and are enriched in individuals with a lean, compared
to an obese, body mass index (BMI). Whether these association patterns reflect
interactions between metabolic partners, as well as whether these associations
play a role in the lean host phenotype with which they associate, remains to be
ascertained. Here, we validated previously reported cooccurrence patterns of the 
two families and their association with a lean BMI with a meta-analysis of 1,821 
metagenomes derived from 10 independent studies. Furthermore, we report positive 
associations at the genus and species levels between Christensenella spp. and
Methanobrevibacter smithii, the most abundant methanogen of the human gut. By
coculturing three Christensenella spp. with M. smithii, we show that
Christensenella spp. efficiently support the metabolism of M. smithii via H2
production far better than Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron does. Christensenella
minuta forms flocs colonized by M. smithii even when H2 is in excess. In culture 
with C. minuta, H2 consumption by M. smithii shifts the metabolic output of C.
minuta's fermentation toward acetate rather than butyrate. Together, these
results indicate that the widespread cooccurrence of these microorganisms is
underpinned by both physical and metabolic interactions. Their combined metabolic
activity may provide insights into their association with a lean host
BMI.IMPORTANCE The human gut microbiome is made of trillions of microbial cells, 
most of which are Bacteria, with a subset of Archaea The bacterial family
Christensenellaceae and the archaeal family Methanobacteriaceae are widespread in
human guts. They correlate with each other and with a lean body type. Whether
species of these two families interact and how they affect the body type are
unanswered questions. Here, we show that species within these families correlate 
with each other across people. We also demonstrate that particular species of
these two families grow together in dense flocs, wherein the bacteria provide
hydrogen gas to the archaea, which then make methane. When the archaea are
present, the ratio of bacterial products (which are nutrients for humans) is
changed. These observations indicate that when these species grow together, their
products have the potential to affect the physiology of their human host.

Copyright © 2020 Ruaud et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.03235-19 
PMCID: PMC7002349
PMID: 32019803 

