
1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Jun;21:321-323. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.10.014.
Epub 2019 Oct 19.

Wide spread of carbapenemase-producing bacterial isolates in a Nigerian
environment.

Le Terrier C(1), Masseron A(1), Uwaezuoke NS(2), Edwin CP(3), Ekuma AE(4),
Olugbeminiyi F(5), Shettima S(6), Ushie S(7), Poirel L(8), Nordmann P(9).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Molecular Microbiology, Section of Medicine, Faculty of Science
and Medicine, University of Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology and Parasitology, National Hospital Abuja, 
Abuja, Nigeria.
(3)Dept of Medical Microbiology & Parasitology, Aminu Kano Teaching, Hospital,
Kano, Nigeria.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Calabar Teaching Hospital,
Calabar, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, National Orthopaedic Hospital, Igbobi,
Lagos, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, Federal Medical Center, Yola, Nigeria.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology & Parasitology, Nnamdi Azikiwe University, 
Nnewi Campus, Nnewi, Nigeria.
(8)Medical and Molecular Microbiology, Section of Medicine, Faculty of Science
and Medicine, University of Fribourg, Switzerland; INSERM European Unit (IAME,
France), University of Fribourg, Switzerland; Swiss National Reference Center for
Emerging Antibiotic Resistance (NARA), University of Fribourg, Switzerland.
Electronic address: laurent.poirel@unifr.ch.
(9)Medical and Molecular Microbiology, Section of Medicine, Faculty of Science
and Medicine, University of Fribourg, Switzerland; INSERM European Unit (IAME,
France), University of Fribourg, Switzerland; Swiss National Reference Center for
Emerging Antibiotic Resistance (NARA), University of Fribourg, Switzerland;
Institute for Microbiology, University of Lausanne and University Hospital
Centre, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: The presence of carbapenemase-producing bacterial isolates is found
not only in hospital and community settings but also in the environment.
Carbapenemase production may be related to acquired, usually plasmid-borne,
β-lactamase genes or to chromosomal genes intrinsic to various species. The aim
of this study was to evaluate the occurrence of such carbapenemase-producing
bacterial isolates among environmental samples from Nigeria.
METHODS: A total of 122 environmental samples were plated on
carbapenem-containing media. A total of 259 isolates were recovered, among which 
124 were carbapenemase-producers according to the results of the Rapidec® Carba
NP test.
RESULTS: The majority of isolates (n=112) recovered corresponded to natural
producers of carbapenemases, i.e. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (n=108),
Burkholderia cepacia (n=1), Shewanella sp. (n=1), Sphingobacterium sp. (n=1) and 
Chryseobacterium gleum (n=1). Ten isolates (mainly Enterobacteriaceae and
Acinetobacter baumannii) produced an acquired carbapenemase, most commonly of the
NDM type. In addition, two Pseudomonas otitidis isolates were identified as
producing the Ambler class B carbapenemase POM-1, further confirming that this
carbapenemase is naturally produced in this environmental species. Finally,
several isolates co-producing 16S rRNA methylases (ArmA, RmtC) and/or
extended-spectrum β-lactamases (CTX-M-9, CTX-M-15) were also identified.
CONCLUSION: This study revealed the presence and diversity of clinically-relevant
antimicrobial-resistant bacteria in the environment in Nigeria.

Copyright © 2019 International Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. Published 
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2019.10.014 
PMID: 31639547 

