
1. Am J Case Rep. 2020 Mar 1;21:e921172. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.921172.

Chryseobacterium gleum Isolation from Respiratory Culture Following
Community-Acquired Pneumonia.

Tsouvalas CP(1), Mousa G(1)(2), Lee AH(1), Philip JA(1)(2), Levine D(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Detroit Medical Center, Detroit, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND Chryseobacterium gleum (C. gleum) is a rare but concerning
device-associated infection that can cause urinary tract infections and
pneumonia. It produces a biofilm and has intrinsic resistance to a wide array of 
broad-spectrum agents. Risk factors include neonate or immunocompromised states, 
intensive care unit admission for more than 21 days, broad-spectrum antibiotic
exposure, indwelling devices, and mechanical ventilation. CASE REPORT A
61-year-old cachectic man presented in the United States with community-acquired 
pneumonia and immediately decompensated, requiring ventilator support. Despite
starting broad-spectrum antibiotics, the patient developed fever, leukocytosis,
and additional desaturation episodes. The patient's respiratory culture grew
numerous C. gleum and few Stenotrophomonas (Xanthomonas) maltophilia. He also had
a positive urine streptococcal pneumonia antigen. Broad-spectrum agents were
discontinued after prolonged treatment due to a continued worsening clinical
picture, and the patient was started on trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole to cover C.
gleum. The patient showed rapid clinical improvement on
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, with resolution of symptoms on post-discharge
follow-up. CONCLUSIONS To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case
report of a documented case of a patient with C. gleum respiratory infection
successfully treated solely with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The expedient
identification of C. gleum is essential for proper treatment. The literature has 
consistently shown isolated respiratory C. gleum strains to be largely
susceptible to fluoroquinolones, piperacillin-tazobactam, or
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.921172 
PMCID: PMC7064143
PMID: 32114590 

