
1. J Clin Med. 2020 Jan 19;9(1). pii: E275. doi: 10.3390/jcm9010275.

Epidemiology, Treatment, and Prevention of Nosocomial Bacterial Pneumonia.

Jean SS(1)(2), Chang YC(3), Lin WC(3), Lee WS(4)(5), Hsueh PR(6)(7), Hsu
CW(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Department of Emergency and Critical Care
Medicine, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medicine University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang
Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(7)Department Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan.

Septicaemia likely results in high case-fatality rates in the present
multidrug-resistant (MDR) era. Amongst them are hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)
and ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP), two frequent fatal septicaemic
entities amongst hospitalised patients. We reviewed the PubMed database to
identify the common organisms implicated in HAP/VAP, to explore the respective
risk factors, and to find the appropriate antibiotic choice. Apart from
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
extended-spectrum β-lactamase-producing Enterobacteriaceae spp., MDR or
extensively drug-resistant (XDR)-Acinetobacter baumannii complex spp., followed
by Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, Chryseobacterium indologenes, and
Elizabethkingia meningoseptica are ranked as the top Gram-negative bacteria (GNB)
implicated in HAP/VAP. Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae notably emerged as
an important concern in HAP/VAP. The above-mentioned pathogens have respective
risk factors involved in their acquisition. In the present XDR era, tigecycline, 
colistin, and ceftazidime-avibactam are antibiotics effective against the
Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase and oxacillinase producers amongst the
Enterobacteriaceae isolates implicated in HAP/VAP. Antibiotic combination
regimens are recommended in the treatment of MDR/XDR-P. aeruginosa or A.
baumannii complex isolates. Some special patient populations need prolonged
courses (>7-day) and/or a combination regimen of antibiotic therapy.
Implementation of an antibiotic stewardship policy and the measures recommended
by the United States (US) Institute for Healthcare were shown to decrease the
incidence rates of HAP/VAP substantially.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9010275 
PMCID: PMC7019939
PMID: 31963877 

Conflict of interest statement: This manuscript has not been published and is not
under consideration for publication elsewhere. The authors have no conflicts of
interest to disclose, and all authors have approved the manuscript, agreeing with
its submission.

