
1. Exp Parasitol. 2020 Feb 19;211:107862. doi: 10.1016/j.exppara.2020.107862. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Chryseobacterium indologenes and Chryseobacterium gleum interact and multiply
intracellularly in Acanthamoeba castellanii.

Lim WG(1), Tong T(1), Chew J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Sunway University, Bandar Sunway, Selangor,
47500, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Sunway University, Bandar Sunway, Selangor,
47500, Malaysia. Electronic address: jacttyc@sunway.edu.my.

Chryseobacterium indologenes and Chryseobacterium gleum are Gram negative
environmental bacteria that have been frequently reported to implicate in fatal
nosocomial infections, such as bacteraemia and ventilator-associated pneumonia in
immunocompromised individuals in the past decades. The interaction between
Chryseobacterium spp. and Acanthamoeba castellanii, a free-living amoeba
ubiquitous in the environment, has not been explored previously. In this study,
C. indologenes and C. gleum were co-cultured with A. castellanii trophozoites and
their interactions were evaluated. Our results showed that when co-cultured with 
A. castellanii, bacterial numbers of C. indologenes and C. gleum increased
significantly (p < 0.05), indicating growth-supporting role of A. castellanii.
Specifically, our findings showed that C. indologenes and C. gleum were able to
associate, invade and/or taken up by A. castellani trophozoites, and multiply
intracellularly at similar rates (p > 0.05). Interestingly, the two
Chryseobacterium spp. associated, invaded and/or taken up by A. castellanii at
significantly higher rates than Escherichia coli K1, a neuropathogenic bacterial 
strain known to interact and replicate intracellularly in A. castellanii
(p < 0.05). However, the ability of both Chryseobacterium spp. to multiply in A. 
castellanii was significantly weaker than E. coli K1 (p < 0.001). This is the
first time that Chryseobacterium spp. and A. castellanii were shown to interact
with each other. The ability to survive intracellularly in A. castellanii may
confer protection to C. indologenes and C. gleum and assist in the survival and
transmission of Chryseobacterium spp. to susceptible hosts within a hospital
setting. Future studies will determine the ability of C. indologenes and C. gleum
survival in A. castellanii cysts and the possible molecular mechanisms involved
in such interactions.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exppara.2020.107862 
PMID: 32087220 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

