
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Oct 20;740:140186. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140186. 
Epub 2020 Jun 15.

Survivor microbial populations in post-chlorinated wastewater are strongly
associated with untreated hospital sewage and include ceftazidime and meropenem
resistant populations.

Beattie RE(1), Skwor T(2), Hristova KR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Marquette University, 1428 W Clybourn
Street, Milwaukee 53233, WI, USA. Electronic address:
rachelle.bailey@marquette.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee,
Milwaukee 53211, WI, USA. Electronic address: skwor@uwm.edu.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Marquette University, 1428 W Clybourn
Street, Milwaukee 53233, WI, USA. Electronic address:
krassimira.hristova@marquette.edu.

Wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) effluent has been implicated in the spread of
antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB), including pathogens, as the WWTP environment
contains multiple selective pressures that may increase mutation rates, pathogen 
survivability, and induce gene transfer between bacteria. In WWTPs receiving
hospital sewage, this selective effect may be more pronounced due to increased
concentrations of antibiotics, ARB, and clinical pathogens from hospital sewage. 
To determine the extent to which hospital sewage contributes to the microbial
community of disinfected wastewater which is released into the environment, we
used 16S rRNA sequencing of hospital sewage, WWTP influent, primary effluent,
Post-Chlorinated Effluent, and receiving sediments in a combined sewage system to
track changes in microbial community composition. We also sequenced the
culturable survivor community resistant to β-lactam antibiotics within
disinfected effluent. Using molecular source tracking, we found that the hospital
sewage microbiome contributes an average of 11.49% of the microbial community in 
Post-Chlorinated Effluents, suggesting microorganisms identified within hospital 
sewage can survive or are enriched by the chlorination disinfection process.
Additionally, we identified 28 potential pathogens to the species level, seven of
which remained detectable in Post-Chlorinated Effluent and environmental
sediments. When Post-Chlorinated Effluents were cultured on media containing
β-lactam antibiotics ceftazidime and meropenem, a diverse antibiotic resistant
survivor community was identified including potential human pathogens Bacillus
cereus, Bacillus pumilus, and Chryseobacterium indologenes. Together, these
results indicate that although wastewater treatment does significantly reduce
pathogenic loads and ARBs, their continual presence in disinfected wastewater and
receiving sediments suggests additional treatment and microbial tracking systems 
are needed to reduce human and animal health risks.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140186 
PMID: 32569917  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

