
1. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2020 Feb 1;78(1):47-53. doi: 10.1684/abc.2019.1512.

Contribution of the Uriselect4® and the CPS ID3® chromogenic media to the
isolation and identification of urinary tract infections bacteria.

Bouslah Z(1), Mahjoub R(2), Allagui Z(3), Dabboussi M(3), Zouaoui M(3), Bibi
A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biologie clinique, Institut National « Zouheir Kallel » de
nutrition et de technologie alimentaire, Tunis, Tunisie, Faculté de médecine,
Université de Tunis-El Manar, Tunis, Tunisie.
(2)Laboratoire de biologie clinique, Institut National « Zouheir Kallel » de
nutrition et de technologie alimentaire, Tunis, Tunisie, Faculté de pharmacie,
Université de Monastir, Monastir, Tunisie.
(3)Laboratoire de biologie clinique, Institut National « Zouheir Kallel » de
nutrition et de technologie alimentaire, Tunis, Tunisie.

Rapid and accurate identification of pathogens involved in urinary tract
infections helps to guide antimicrobial therapy. Chromogenic agars provide
presumptive identification directly from primary isolation media. They have been 
intended to make the bacterial isolation and identification process easier and
faster. Our study aimed to compare the performance and the cost of the CPS ID3®
and the Uriselect4® chromogenic agars with the conventional method for the
isolation and identification of urinary tract infections bacteria. We included
301 urinary samples in a prospective study conducted in May 2018 in the clinical 
laboratory of the National institute of nutrition and food technology of Tunis.
Isolates from routine media were identified using API® system while isolates from
chromogenic media were directly identified by colony color with reference to the 
manufacturer's recommendations. Chromogenic media yielded more pure positive
cultures and allowed better isolation of Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Citrobacter koseri, Morganella morganii and Streptococcus agalactiae. Sensitivity
and specificity of the presumptive identification of most commonly isolated
uropathogens were higher with the Uriselect4® medium than with the CPS ID3®
medium. Chromogenic media yielded the identification of pathogenic organisms 24
hours sooner than the conventional method in approximately 63 % of cases with the
CPS ID3® medium and in 77.7% of cases with the Uriselect4® medium. Chromogenic
media allowed a much better isolation of bacteria commonly involved in urinary
tract infections with a quick, easy and accurate presumptive identification
especially with the Uriselect4® medium.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2019.1512 
PMID: 31974073  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

