
1. mSphere. 2020 Aug 19;5(4). pii: e00525-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00525-20.

Tracking of Antibiotic Resistance Transfer and Rapid Plasmid Evolution in a
Hospital Setting by Nanopore Sequencing.

Peter S(1)(2), Bosio M(#)(3)(4), Gross C(#)(5), Bezdan D(3), Gutierrez J(6),
Oberhettinger P(7)(2), Liese J(7)(2), Vogel W(8), Dörfel D(8)(9), Berger L(5),
Marschal M(7)(2), Willmann M(7)(2), Gut I(6)(10), Gut M(6)(10), Autenrieth
I(7)(2), Ossowski S(11)(5)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany silke.peter@med.uni-tuebingen.de
stephan.ossowski@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(3)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Barcelona Supercomputing Center, BSC, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(6)CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science 
and Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany.
(8)Medical Center, Department of Hematology, Oncology, Immunology, Rheumatology &
Pulmonology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(9)Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium
(DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.
(10)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology, Barcelona, Spain silke.peter@med.uni-tuebingen.de
stephan.ossowski@med.uni-tuebingen.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Infections with multidrug-resistant bacteria often leave limited or no treatment 
options. The transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes (ARG) carrying plasmids
between bacterial species by horizontal gene transfer represents an important
mode of expansion of ARGs. Here, we demonstrate the application of Nanopore
sequencing in a hospital setting for monitoring transfer and rapid evolution of
antibiotic resistance plasmids within and across multiple species. In 2009, we
experienced an outbreak with extensively multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas
aeruginosa harboring the carbapenemase-encoding bla IMP-8 gene. In 2012, the
first Citrobacter freundii and Citrobacter cronae strains harboring the same gene
were detected. Using Nanopore and Illumina sequencing, we conducted comparative
analysis of all bla IMP-8 bacteria isolated in our hospital over a 6-year period 
(n = 54). We developed the computational platform plasmIDent for Nanopore-based
characterization of clinical isolates and monitoring of ARG transfer, comprising 
de novo assembly of genomes and plasmids, plasmid circularization, ARG
annotation, comparative genome analysis of multiple isolates, and visualization
of results. Using plasmIDent, we identified a 40-kb plasmid carrying bla IMP-8 in
P. aeruginosa and C. freundii, verifying the plasmid transfer. Within C.
freundii, the plasmid underwent further evolution and plasmid fusion, resulting
in a 164-kb megaplasmid, which was transferred to C. cronae Multiple
rearrangements of the multidrug resistance gene cassette were detected in P.
aeruginosa, including deletions and translocations of complete ARGs. In summary, 
plasmid transfer, plasmid fusion, and rearrangement of the ARG cassette mediated 
the rapid evolution of opportunistic pathogens in our hospital. We demonstrated
the feasibility of near-real-time monitoring of plasmid evolution and ARG
transfer in clinical settings, enabling successful countermeasures to contain
plasmid-mediated outbreaks.IMPORTANCE Infections with multidrug-resistant
bacteria represent a major threat to global health. While the spread of
multidrug-resistant bacterial clones is frequently studied in the hospital
setting, surveillance of the transfer of mobile genetic elements between
different bacterial species was difficult until recent advances in sequencing
technologies. Nanopore sequencing technology was applied to track antimicrobial
gene transfer in a long-term outbreak of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Citrobacter freundii, and Citrobacter cronae in a German hospital
over 6 years. We developed a novel computational pipeline, pathoLogic, which
enables de novo assembly of genomes and plasmids, antimicrobial resistance gene
annotation and visualization, and comparative analysis. Applying this approach,
we detected plasmid transfer between different bacterial species as well as
plasmid fusion and frequent rearrangements of the antimicrobial resistance gene
cassette. This study demonstrated the feasibility of near-real-time tracking of
plasmid-based antimicrobial resistance gene transfer in hospitals, enabling
countermeasures to contain plasmid-mediated outbreaks.

Copyright © 2020 Peter et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00525-20 
PMCID: PMC7440845
PMID: 32817379 

