
1. J Zoo Wildl Med. 2020 Jan 9;50(4):758-768. doi: 10.1638/2018-0117.

DISEASE AND PATHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS OF AN ENDANGERED RODENT, MICROTUS
CALIFORNICUS SCIRPENSIS, IN A CAPTIVE-REARING FACILITY AND IN THE WILD.

Foley J(1), Allan N(2)(3), Pesapane R(2), Johnson A(4), Woods L(5), Brignolo
L(6), Luce A(2), Clifford DL(3), Imai DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA, jefoley@ucdavis.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(3)Wildlife Investigations Lab, California Department of Fish and Wildlife,
Rancho Cordova, CA 95670, USA.
(4)Comparative Pathology Laboratory, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(5)California Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory System, Davis Branch,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(6)UC Davis Campus Veterinary Services, University of California, Davis, CA
95616, USA.

Causes of morbidity and mortality and a survey of infectious disease agents were 
collated from wild and colony-raised endangered Amargosa voles (Microtus
californicus scirpensis). Six voles from the wild and 295 voles in the
captive-breeding colony were included in the study upon identification of an
infectious agent during screening, identification of clinical signs of disease,
or finding a pathological condition or infectious agent on necropsy. Findings
included 28 significant or incidental pathological conditions of seven organ
systems and 19 parasitic, viral, bacterial, or fungal agents. Several voles
captured in the wild had fungal osteomyelitis of the tail that disseminated
systemically in a vole brought from the wild to the colony and may have been
caused by a Penicillium sp. Three voles reintroduced from the colony to the wild 
experienced inanition and subsequent severe hepatic and moderate renal tubular
lipidosis. The most common significant pathological conditions in colony-reared
voles were chronic interstitial nephritis with proteinosis; cardiomyopathy;
trichobezoars that, in intestines or cecocolic junctions, sometimes induced local
rupture or infarction with peritonitis; multifocal gastrointestinal ulceration
and colibacillosis; acute renal tubular necrosis or nephritis; sepsis; hepatic
and renal lipidosis; molar apical elongation sometimes progressing to invasion of
the calvarium; and mammary tumors. Uncommon diagnoses included intervertebral
disc disease; microvascular dysplasia; and multifocal bacterial abscessation.
Common or clinically important infectious agents included Demodex sp. mites in
hair follicles, Demodex sp. in esophageal mucosa, and an outbreak of tropical rat
mites thought to have been introduced via the straw bedding; gastrointestinal
Helicobacter sp.; attaching and effacing Escherichia coli; and Citrobacter
braakii, a possible zoonotic bacterium. This survey of species-specific diseases 
and pathogens was possible because the established health surveillance program
that is part of the species recovery plan allowed for monitoring of voles
throughout the duration of their natural life spans in captivity.

DOI: 10.1638/2018-0117 
PMID: 31926505  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

