
1. Animals (Basel). 2020 May 28;10(6). pii: E936. doi: 10.3390/ani10060936.

Metataxonomic and Histopathological Study of Rabbit Epizootic Enteropathy in
Mexico.

Puón-Peláez XD(1), McEwan NR(2), Gómez-Soto JG(3), Álvarez-Martínez RC(4),
Olvera-Ramírez AM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Doctorado en Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad 
Autónoma de Querétaro, Avenida de las Ciencias S/N Juriquilla, Delegación Santa
Rosa Jáuregui, Santiago de Querétaro, Qro. C.P. 76230, Mexico.
(2)School of Pharmacy & Life Sciences, Robert Gordon University, Garthdee Road,
Aberdeen AB10 7GJ, Scotland, UK.
(3)Cuerpo Académico de Nutrición y Reproducción Animal, Facultad de Ciencias
Naturales, Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro, Avenida de las Ciencias S/N
Juriquilla, Delegación Santa Rosa Jáuregui, Santiago de Querétaro, Qro. C.P.
76230, Mexico.
(4)Licenciatura en Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias Naturales, Universidad
Autónoma de Querétaro, Av. Junipero Serra, antiguo aeropuerto, Campus Aeropuerto 
S/N. Santiago de Querétaro, Qro. C.P. 76140, Mexico.
(5)Cuerpo Académico Salud Animal y Microbiología Ambiental, Facultad de Ciencias 
Naturales, Universidad Autónoma de Querétaro, Avenida de las Ciencias S/N
Juriquilla, Delegación Santa Rosa Jáuregui, Santiago de Querétaro C.P. 76230,
Mexico.

Epizootic rabbit enteropathy (ERE) affects young rabbits and represents 32% of
the enteropathies in rabbit production farms in Mexico. The etiology of this
syndrome has not been clarified yet. A metataxonomic and histopathology study of 
ERE was carried out to compare the gastrointestinal microbiota and
histopathological lesions of healthy and positive-ERE rabbits. The metataxonomic 
study was done using an Illumina MiSeq (MiSeq® system, Illumina, San Diego
California, USA) massive segmentation platform, and a Divisive Amplicon Denoising
Algorithm 2 (DADA2 algorithm) was used to obtain Shannon and Simpson diversity
indices as well as the relative abundance of the identified communities. For the 
histopathological study, paraffin sections of the cecum, ileo-cecal valve, and
colon were stained with eosin and hematoxylin. AxioVision 4.9 software (Carl
Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Jena, Germany) was used to measure the crypt depths.
Statistical analysis was done using PERMANOVA analysis for the metataxonomic
study and ANOVA for the histopathology study. Histopathologic analysis showed
smaller sizes of crypts in the colon of ERE rabbits. Differences were observed in
the diversity and abundance of the gastrointestinal microbiota between the
analyzed groups. The genus Clostridium and the species Cloacibacillus porcorum
and Akkermansia muciniphila were associated with ERE. The results obtained from
this study can provide information for future clarification of the etiology and
proposals of effective treatments.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10060936 
PMCID: PMC7341505
PMID: 32481706 

Conflict of interest statement: The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of 
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results. The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

