
1. Eur J Med Chem. 2020 Aug 29;208:112776. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2020.112776. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Efficient chemoenzymatic synthesis of fluorinated sialyl Thomsen-Friedenreich
antigens and investigation of their characteristics.

Li T(1), Zhang H(1), Guo Y(1), Zhu T(2), Yu P(1), Meng X(3).

Author information: 
(1)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Sino-French Joint Lab of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Industrial
Fermentation Microbiology of Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Industry Microbiology, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science
and Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China.
(2)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Sino-French Joint Lab of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Industrial
Fermentation Microbiology of Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Industry Microbiology, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science
and Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China; CanSino Biologics Inc., Tianjin
Enterprise Key Laboratory of Respiratory Bacterial Recombination and Conjugated
Vaccine, Tianjin, 300457, China.
(3)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Sino-French Joint Lab of Food
Nutrition/Safety and Medicinal Chemistry, Key Laboratory of Industrial
Fermentation Microbiology of Ministry of Education, Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Industry Microbiology, College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science
and Technology, Tianjin, 300457, China. Electronic address: mengxin@tust.edu.cn.

A set of fluorinated sialyl-T derivatives were efficiently synthesized using
one-pot multi-enzyme (OPME) chemoenzymatic approach. The P. multocida
α2-3-sialyltransferase (PmST1) involved in the synthesis showed extremely
flexible donor and acceptor substrate specificities. These sialosides have been
successfully investigated with stability towards Clostridium perfringens
sialidase substrate specificity assay using 1H NMR spectroscopy. Hydrolysis
studies monitored by 1H NMR clearly demonstrated that the fluorine substitution
obviously reduced hydrolysis rate of Clostridium perfringens sialidase. To
further investigate the fluorine influence, structure-dependent variation of
sialoside-lectin binding was observed for MAL and different sialoside-immobilized
surfaces. Subtle changes on the ligand of carbohydrate-binding protein were
distinguished by SPR. These fluorinated sialyl-T derivatives obtained are
valuable probes for further biological studies or antitumor drug design.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2020.112776 
PMID: 32896759 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

