
1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Aug 13. pii: keaa316. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/keaa316. [Epub ahead of print]

Influence of proton pump inhibitor or rebamipide use on gut microbiota of
rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Kim JW(1), Jeong Y(2)(3), Park SJ(2), Jin H(2), Lee J(4), Ju JH(4), Ji GE(2)(3), 
Park SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Daegu Catholic
University School of Medicine, Daegu.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, Research Institute of Human Ecology, Seoul
National University, Seoul.
(3)Research Center, BIFIDO Co., Ltd, Hongcheon.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul St Mary's
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with RA commonly use gastrointestinal (GI) protective drugs
for treatment and prevention of drug-associated GI injuries. However, how these
drugs affect the gut microbiota in RA patients remains unknown. The objective of 
this study was to examine the gut microbiota of RA patients according to use of
GI protective drugs such as proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), histamine 2-receptor
antagonists and rebamipide.
METHODS: Faecal samples were obtained from 15 healthy controls and 32 RA patients
who were receiving PPI, histamine 2-receptor antagonist or rebamipide. Bacterial 
DNA was extracted from the faecal samples and 16S rRNA sequencing was performed. 
Microbial composition and function were analysed using Quantitative Insights Into
Microbial Ecology and Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction
of Unobserved States.
RESULTS: RA patients exhibited reduced diversity and altered composition of the
gut microbiota compared with healthy controls. The gut microbiota of RA patients 
receiving acid-suppressing drugs, particularly PPIs, was distinct from that of RA
patients receiving rebamipide (PPI vs rebamipide, P = 0.005). Streptococcus was
enriched in RA patients receiving PPI, while Clostridium bolteae was enriched in 
RA patients receiving rebamipide. The gut microbiota of PPI users was abundant
with microbial functional pathway involved in the production of virulence
factors. This featured microbial function was positively correlated with relative
abundance of Streptococcus, the differentially abundant taxa of PPI users.
CONCLUSION: The gut microbiota of RA patients receiving PPIs was distinguishable 
from that of those receiving rebamipide. The enriched virulent function in the
gut microbiota of PPI users suggests that inappropriate PPI use may be harmful in
RA patients.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa316 
PMID: 32789440 

