
1. Pharmeur Bio Sci Notes. 2020;2020:53-124.

Collaborative study for the validation of cell line assays for in-process
toxicity and antigenicity testing of Clostridium septicum vaccine antigens - Part
1.

Daas A(1), Behr-Gross ME(1), Bruckner L(2), Redhead K(3).

Author information: 
(1)European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare (EDQM),
Department of Biological Standardisation, OMCL Network & HealthCare (DBO),
Council of Europe, Strasbourg, France.
(2)Bifitstrasse 74, CH-3145 Niederscherli, Switzerland.
(3)Vaccine & Assay Consultancy Ltd, 29 Evans Avenue, Watford, WD25 0EX, United
Kingdom.

Large numbers of mice are used in testing during the production of Clostridial
vaccines. Previous work has indicated that cell line assays could replace mouse
tests for certain aspects of this testing. Replacement assays have been developed
for the testing of the toxins and toxoids of several clostridial species but none
of these assays have been assessed in an international collaborative study. Under
the common aegis of the European Partnership for Alternative Approaches to Animal
Testing (EPAA) and of the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines &
HealthCare (EDQM), collaborative study BSP130 was initiated to evaluate Vero cell
based alternative methods to the current mouse tests used to measure the toxicity
of Clostridium septicum toxin (the minimum lethal dose (MLD) test), the freedom
from toxicity of C. septicum toxoid (the MLD test) and the antigenicity of C.
septicum toxoid (the total combining power (TCP) test). The principal aims of
BSP130 were to determine the repeatability and reproducibility of the in vitro
assays and to demonstrate concordance of the proposed in vitro and current in
vivo TCP and MLD tests. 11 laboratories from 7 countries participated in the
collaborative study and each tested 6 toxins and 6 toxoids. The participants'
Vero cell lines were up to 1 000 times more sensitive than the mouse strains. The
MLD assay in mice and on Vero cells generally ranked the toxins in a similar
order in most of the laboratories. The TCP assay in mice and on Vero cells also
generally ranked the toxoids in a similar order in most of the laboratories. The 
results demonstrate that the repeatability and reproducibility of the in vitro
Vero cell based assays are no worse than that of the in vivo assays and that they
are easily transferable to other laboratories. The concordance correlations
between the in vivo and in vitro methods were for the MLD assays ρc=0.961
(log-transformed values) and ρc=0.921 (non-log-transformed values) and for the
TCP assays ρc=0.968 (log-transformed values) and ρc=0.980 (non log-transformed
values). These correlations are excellent showing that the Vero cell assays can
be used as alternatives to the mouse tests for the assessment of C. septicum
toxin MLD and toxoid TCP values. This study can be used by vaccine manufacturing 
companies as a guide for applying the same approach to other clostridial toxins
and toxoids.

© Council of Europe 2020.


PMID: 32589137 

