
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Jun;63:102210. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102210. Epub 2020 May 
15.

Clostridioides difficile proline fermentation in response to commensal
clostridia.

Lopez CA(1), McNeely TP(2), Nurmakova K(3), Beavers WN(4), Skaar EP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Vanderbilt Institute for Infection,
Immunology, and Inflammation, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA; Department of Biological Sciences, California State University,
Sacramento, Sacramento, CA, USA. Electronic address: c.lopez@csus.edu.
(2)Belmont University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Berea College, Berea, KY, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Vanderbilt Institute for Infection,
Immunology, and Inflammation, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.

Clostridioides difficile colonizes the intestines of susceptible individuals and 
releases toxins that mediate disease. To replicate and expand in the intestines, 
C. difficile ferments proline, and this activity is influenced by the
availability of proline and trace nutrients. C. difficile must also compete with 
the commensal microbiota for these limited nutrients. The specific microbes
present in the intestines that may shape the ability of C. difficile to benefit
from proline fermentation are unknown. In this study we developed a panel of
commensal Clostridia to test the hypothesis that the microbiota influences
C. difficile growth through proline fermentation. The experimental panel of
Clostridia was composed of murine and human isolates that ranged in their
capacity to ferment proline in different media. Competition between wild type
C. difficile and a mutant strain unable to ferment proline (prdB:CT) in the
presence of these Clostridia revealed that bacteria closely related to
Paraclostridium benzoelyticum and Paeniclostridium spp. decreased the benefit to 
C. difficile provided by proline fermentation. Conversely, Clostridium
xylanolyticum drove C. difficile towards an increased reliance on proline
fermentation for growth. Overall, the ability of C. difficile to benefit from
proline fermentation is contextual and in part dependent on the microbiota.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102210 
PMID: 32422411 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

