
1. Cell Signal. 2020 Nov;75:109776. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2020.109776. Epub 2020
Sep 8.

Clostridium perfringens phospholipase C impairs innate immune response by
inducing integrated stress response and mitochondrial-induced epigenetic
modifications.

Bunkar N(1), Sharma J(1), Chouksey A(1), Kumari R(1), Gupta PK(1), Tiwari R(1),
Lodhi L(1), Srivastava RK(2), Bhargava A(1), Mishra PK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, ICMR-National Institute for Research in
Environmental Health, Bhopal, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, ICMR-National Institute for Research in
Environmental Health, Bhopal, India. Electronic address: pkm_8bh@yahoo.co.uk.

Clostridium perfringens, a rod-shaped, gram-positive, anaerobic, spore-forming
bacterium is one of the most widely occurring bacterial pathogens, associated
with a spectrum of diseases in humans. A major virulence factor during its
infection is the enzyme phospholipase C encoded by the plc gene, known as
Clostridium perfringens phospholipase C (CpPLC). The present study was designed
to understand the role of CpPLC in inducing survival mechanisms and
mitochondrial-induced epigenetic changes in a human lymphocyte cell culture
model. Following exposure to CpPLC, a significant generation of mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species was observed, which coincided with the changes in the
expression of vital components of MAP/ERK/RTK signaling cascade that regulates
the downstream cellular functions. These disturbances further led to alterations 
in the mitochondrial genome and functioning. This was supported by the observed
upregulation in the expression of mitochondrial fission genes Drp1, Fis1, and
Mff, and mitochondrial fusion genes MFN1, MFN2, and OPA1 following CpPLC
exposure. CpPLC exposed cells showed upregulation of OMA1, DELE1, and HRI genes
involved in the integrated stress response (ISR), which suggests that it may
induce the ISR that provides a pro-survival mechanism to the host cell. CpPLC
also initiated immune patho-physiologic mechanisms including
mitochondrial-induced epigenetic modifications through a mitochondrial-ROS driven
signaling pathway. Interestingly, epigenetic machinery not only play a pivotal
role in lymphocyte homeostasis by contributing to cell-fate decisions but thought
to be one of the mechanisms by which intracellular pathogens survive within the
host cells. Importantly, the impairment of mtDNA repair among the CpPLC exposed
cells, induced alterations within mtDNA methylation, and led to the deregulation 
of MT-CO1, MT-ND6, MT-ATPase 6, and MT-ATPase8 gene expression profiles that are 
important for mitochondrial bioenergetics and subsequent metabolic pathways. This
was further confirmed by the changes in the activity of mitochondrial electron
chain complexes (complex I, II, III, IV and V). The altered mtDNA methylation
profile was also found to be closely associated with the varied expression of
mitomiRs and their targets. CpPLC exposed cells showed up-regulation of miR24
expression and down-regulation of miR34a, miR150, and miR155, while the increased
expression of mitomiR target genes i.e. of K-Ras, MYC, EGFR, and NF-kβ was also
observed in these cells. Altogether, our findings provide novel insights into the
derailment of redox signaling machinery in CpPLC treated lymphocytes and its role
in the induction of survival mechanisms and mitochondrial-induced epigenetic
modifications.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2020.109776 
PMID: 32916276 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.

