
1. J Microbiol Methods. 2020 Feb;169:105818. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2019.105818. Epub 
2019 Dec 25.

Evaluation of methods for DNA extraction from Clostridium tyrobutyricum spores
and its detection by qPCR.

Esteban M(1), Marcos P(1), Horna C(2), Galan-Malo P(3), Mata L(3), Pérez MD(1),
Calvo M(1), Sánchez L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón (IA2), Universidad de
Zaragoza-CITA, Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón (IA2), Universidad de
Zaragoza-CITA, Zaragoza, Spain; ZEULAB, Bari 25 dpdo, 50197 Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)ZEULAB, Bari 25 dpdo, 50197 Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón (IA2), Universidad de
Zaragoza-CITA, Zaragoza, Spain. Electronic address: lousanchez@unizar.es.

Clostridium tyrobutyricum is the major agent that causes the blowing defect in
cheese due to the germination of its dormant spores during the ripening stage. As
a result, many of the affected cheeses show cavities and cracks, which cause the 
product loss in most cases. Nowadays, there is not a fast method capable of
detecting milk contaminated with C. tyrobutyricum spores. The aim of this study
has been to develop a fast and reliable method based on real time PCR (qPCR) to
detect C. tyrobutyricum spores in raw milk. One of the main limitations has been 
to find a good procedure for the spore disruption to extract the DNA due to its
high resistance. For this reason, different disruption methods have been tested, 
including chemical agents, bead beating, enzymatic and microwave treatment.
Furthermore, an enzymatic treatment with subtilisin was applied for milk
clarification and recovery of spores. The comparison of the assayed methods has
been made using sterile milk spiked with C. tyrobutyricum spores, obtained in
solid or liquid medium. The results showed that microwave treatment followed by a
standard DNA purification step was found to be the best disruption method. The Ct
values obtained for spores were higher than those found for vegetative cells by
qPCR, for the same quantity of DNA. This difference could be due to the action of
the Small Acid Soluble Proteins (SASP) in the DNA packaging of spores. Moreover, 
spores obtained in agar plate were found more resistant to disruption than those 
obtained in liquid medium. Subtilisin and microwave treatments were found to be
successful for DNA extraction from C. tyrobutyricum spores in milk and subsequent
identification by qPCR. However, the differences observed between the
amplification of DNA from spores obtained in different media and from vegetative 
cells have to be taken into account to optimize a method for C. tyrobutyricum
detection.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mimet.2019.105818 
PMID: 31881287 

