
1. Biologicals. 2020 Mar;64:10-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2020.02.001. Epub 2020
Feb 11.

A next-generation sequencing based method for determining genetic stability in
Clostridium tetani vaccine strains.

Pennings JLA(1), Abachin E(2), Uhlrich S(2), Esson R(2), Mallet L(2), Vandebriel 
RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
jeroen.pennings@rivm.nl.
(2)Sanofi Pasteur, 1541 Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280, Marcy l'Etoile, France.
(3)Centre for Health Protection, National Institute for Public Health and the
Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.

Production of tetanus and other clostridial vaccines highly depends on the stable
and reproducible production of high toxin levels. This creates a need to ensure
the genetic stability of seed strains. We developed a two-stage method for
improved assessment of the genetic stability of Clostridium seed strains. This
method is based on next-generation sequencing (NGS) of strain DNA and mapping the
sequence reads to a reference sequence. The output allows analysis of global
genome consistency followed, if necessary, by detailed expert judgement of
potential deviations at the gene level. The limit of detection of our method is
an order of magnitude better than that of the currently established pulsed-field 
gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Improved genetic characterization of bacterial seed
lots will have a positive impact on the characterization of the production
process. This will be a first step towards applying the consistency approach to
vaccine batch release of established vaccines. This can contribute to the
reduction and ultimately replacement of routinely used animal tests in vaccine
production. This work was carried out as part of the Innovative Medicines
Initiative 2 (IMI2) project VAC2VAC (Vaccine batch to vaccine batch comparison by
consistency testing).

Copyright © 2020 International Alliance for Biological Standardization. Published
by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biologicals.2020.02.001 
PMID: 32057566 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Eric Abachin,
Sylvie Uhlrich, and Raphaël Esson are employees of Sanofi Pasteur. Laurent Mallet
was employed by Sanofi Pasteur at the time of the work. Jeroen Pennings and Rob
Vandebriel have no conflicts.

