
1. J Lipid Res. 2020 Jul 13. pii: jlr.RA120001021. doi: 10.1194/jlr.RA120001021.
[Epub ahead of print]

Biogeography of microbial bile acid transformations along the murine gut.

Marion S(1), Desharnais L(2), Studer N(3), Dong Y(3), Notter MD(3), Poudel S(4), 
Menin L(5), Janowczyk A(6), Hettich RL(7), Hapfelmeier S(3), Bernier-Latmani
R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Engineering, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, United States.
(5)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, EPFL, Switzerland.
(6)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
(7)Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, United States.
(8)Environmental Sciences and Engineering, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
rizlan.bernier-latmani@epfl.ch.

Bile acids, synthesized from cholesterol by the liver, are chemically transformed
along the intestinal tract by the gut microbiota and the products of these
transformations signal through host receptors, impacting overall host health.
These transformations include bile acid deconjugation, oxidation, and
7α-dehydroxylation. An understanding of the biogeography of bile acid
transformations in the gut is critical because deconjugation is a prerequisite
for 7α-dehydroxylation and because most gut microorganisms harbor bile acid
transformation capacity. Here, we used a coupled metabolomic and metaproteomic
approach to probe in vivo activity of the gut microbial community in a
gnotobiotic mouse model. Results revealed the involvement of Clostridium scindens
in 7α-dehydroxylation, of the genera Muribaculum and Bacteroides in
deconjugation, and of six additional organisms in oxidation (the genera
Clostridium, Muribaculum, Bacteroides, Bifidobacterium, Acutalibacter and
Akkermansia). Furthermore, the bile acid profile in mice with a more complex
microbiota, with a dysbiosed microbiota or with no microbiota was considered. For
instance, conventional mice harbor a large diversity of bile acids, but treatment
with an antibiotic such as clindamycin results in complete inhibition of
7α-dehydroxylation, underscoring the strong inhibition of organisms able to carry
out this process by this compound. Finally, comparison of the hepatic bile acid
pool size as a function of microbiota revealed that a reduced microbiota affects 
host signaling but not necessarily bile acid synthesis. In this study, bile acid 
transformations were mapped to the associated active microorganisms, offering a
systematic characterization of the relationship between microbiota and bile acid 
composition.

Published under license by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1194/jlr.RA120001021 
PMID: 32661017 

