
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Mar 18;86(7). pii: e02782-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02782-19. Print 2020 Mar 18.

Ferrous-Iron-Activated Transcriptional Factor AdhR Regulates Redox Homeostasis in
Clostridium beijerinckii.

Yang B(1)(2), Nie X(1), Xiao Y(1), Gu Y(1), Jiang W(1), Yang C(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS-Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Shanghai Institute of Plant
Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)CAS-Key Laboratory of Synthetic Biology, Shanghai Institute of Plant
Physiology and Ecology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China
chenyang@sibs.ac.cn.

The AdhR regulatory protein is an activator of σ54-dependent transcription of
adhA1 and adhA2 genes, which are required for alcohol synthesis in Clostridium
beijerinckii Here, we identified the signal perceived by AdhR and determined the 
regulatory mechanism of AdhR activity. By assaying the activity of AdhR in
N-terminally truncated forms, a negative control mechanism of AdhR activity was
identified in which the central AAA+ domain is subject to repression by the
N-terminal GAF and PAS domains. Binding of Fe2+ to the GAF domain was found to
relieve intramolecular repression and stimulate the ATPase activity of AdhR,
allowing the AdhR to activate transcription. This control mechanism enables AdhR 
to regulate transcription of adhA1 and adhA2 in response to cellular redox
status. The mutants deficient in AdhR or σ54 showed large shifts in intracellular
redox state indicated by the NADH/NAD+ ratio under conditions of increased
electron availability or oxidative stress. We demonstrated that the
Fe2+-activated transcriptional regulator AdhR and σ54 control alcohol synthesis
to maintain redox homeostasis in clostridial cells. Expression of N-terminally
truncated forms of AdhR resulted in improved solvent production by C.
beijerinckii IMPORTANCE Solventogenic clostridia are anaerobic bacteria that can 
produce butanol, ethanol, and acetone, which can be used as biofuels or building 
block chemicals. Here, we show that AdhR, a σ54-dependent transcriptional
activator, senses the intracellular redox status and controls alcohol synthesis
in Clostridium beijerinckii AdhR provides a new example of a GAF domain
coordinating a mononuclear non-heme iron to sense and transduce the redox signal.
Our study reveals a previously unrecognized functional role of σ54 in control of 
cellular redox balance and provides new insights into redox signaling and
regulation in clostridia. Our results reveal AdhR as a novel engineering target
for improving solvent production by C. beijerinckii and other solventogenic
clostridia.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02782-19 
PMCID: PMC7082586
PMID: 32005735 

