
1. Clin Nutr. 2020 May 11. pii: S0261-5614(20)30218-1. doi:
10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Gut microbiota alteration in a mouse model of Anorexia Nervosa.

Breton J(1), Tirelle P(2), Hasanat S(2), Pernot A(2), L'Huillier C(2), do Rego
JC(3), Déchelotte P(1), Coëffier M(1), Bindels LB(4), Ribet D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM UMR1073, Nutrition, inflammation et
dysfonction de l'axe intestin-cerveau, Rouen, France; Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France; Rouen
University Hospital, Nutrition Department, Rouen, France.
(2)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM UMR1073, Nutrition, inflammation et
dysfonction de l'axe intestin-cerveau, Rouen, France; Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France.
(3)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine
(IRIB), Rouen, France; Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Behavioural Analysis Platform
(SCAC), Rouen, France.
(4)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute,
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, INSERM UMR1073, Nutrition, inflammation et
dysfonction de l'axe intestin-cerveau, Rouen, France; Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France.
Electronic address: david.ribet@inserm.fr.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Anorexia Nervosa is a severe disease depending on both
biological, psychological and environmental factors. The gut microbiota has
recently been proposed as one of the biological factors potentially involved in
the onset or maintenance of Anorexia Nervosa. To unravel the potential role of
the gut microbiota in this disease, we characterized the dysbiosis occurring in a
mouse model of Anorexia and correlated bacteria level changes with different
physiological parameters such as body weight, food intake or levels of
hypothalamic neuropeptides.
METHODS: We used the Activity-Based Anorexia (ABA) mouse model, which combines
food restriction and physical activity, and which mimics core features of
Anorexia Nervosa. We characterized the gut microbiota alteration in ABA mice by
combining 16S rRNA gene sequencing and quantitative PCR analyses of targeted
genera or species.
RESULTS: We identified 68 amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) with decreased levels
and 8 ASVs with increased levels in the cecal content of ABA mice compared to
control mice. We observed in particular in ABA mice increases in the abundance of
Clostridium cocleatum and several Lactobacillus species and a decrease in the
abundance of Burkholderiales compared to control mice. Interestingly, we show
that most of the observed gut microbiota alterations are due to food restriction 
and are not affected by physical activity. In addition, we identified several
bacterial groups that correlate with mice body weight, food intake, lean and fat 
masses as well as with hypothalamic mRNA levels of NPY (Neuropeptide Y) and POMC 
(Pro-opiomelanocortin).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a comprehensive characterization of the gut
microbiota dysbiosis occurring in the Activity-Based Anorexia mouse model. These 
data constitute a valuable resource to further decipher the role of the gut
microbiota in the different facets of anorexia pathophysiology, such as
functional gastrointestinal disorders, appetite regulation and mood disorders.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.002 
PMID: 32460959 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest PD is a co-founder of the
TargEDys company; JB, PT, SH, AP, CL, JCDR, MC, LB, DR, no conflicts of interest.

