
1. Am J Case Rep. 2020 Sep 29;21:e922521. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.922521.

A Case of Postoperative Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus Enterocolitis
in an 81-Year-Old Man and Review of the Literature.

Gururangan K(1)(2), Holubar MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Santa
Clara, CA, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND Nosocomial diarrhea affects 12% to 32% of hospitalized patients.
Before the development of the Clostridium difficile cytotoxin assay in the 1970s,
Staphylococcus aureus was frequently implicated as a cause of hospital-acquired
infectious colitis, particularly in association with recent antibiotic therapy or
abdominal surgery. Decreased utilization of stool culture has reduced the
recognition of S. aureus as a rare, but historically important, cause of
enterocolitis. CASE REPORT An 81-year-old man with no recent history of travel,
exposure to potential infectious sources (e.g., sick contacts, animals,
undercooked foods), or antibiotic or proton-pump inhibitor use was admitted for a
Whipple procedure (expanded intraoperatively with total pancreatectomy,
splenectomy, and portal vein resection) for stage III pancreatic adenocarcinoma. 
On postoperative day (POD) 5, the patient developed large-volume watery diarrhea 
that did not improve with tube feeding cessation and oral pancreatic enzyme
replacement. He subsequently became clinically septic on POD10, and workup
revealed severe radiographic sigmoid and rectal colitis and methicillin-resistant
S. aureus (MRSA) bacteremia. Polymerase chain reaction testing for C. difficile
was negative twice (POD5 and POD12). He was diagnosed with MRSA proctocolitis and
improved with initiation of oral and intravenous vancomycin. CONCLUSIONS We
describe a case of staphylococcal enterocolitis, a previously common cause of
nosocomial diarrhea that has become increasingly underappreciated since the
advent of culture-independent stool testing for C. difficile. Increased awareness
of this entity, especially when Clostridium assays are negative, may guide more
effective treatment of hospital-acquired infection.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.922521 
PMID: 32989210 

