
1. BMC Microbiol. 2020 Jan 2;20(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s12866-019-1669-2.

Method comparison for the direct enumeration of bacterial species using a
chemostat model of the human colon.

Moura IB(1), Normington C(2), Ewin D(2), Clark E(2), Wilcox MH(2)(3), Buckley
AM(2), Chilton CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Medical Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. i.b.moura@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)Leeds Institute of Medical Research, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Leeds, UK.

BACKGROUND: Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) has a high recurrent
infection rate. Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been used
successfully to treat recurrent CDI, but much remains unknown about the human gut
microbiota response to replacement therapies. In this study, antibiotic-mediated 
dysbiosis of gut microbiota and bacterial growth dynamics were investigated by
two quantitative methods: real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) and direct culture
enumeration, in triple-stage chemostat models of the human colon. Three in vitro 
models were exposed to clindamycin to induce simulated CDI. All models were
treated with vancomycin, and two received an FMT. Populations of total bacteria, 
Bacteroides spp., Lactobacillus spp., Enterococcus spp., Bifidobacterium spp., C.
difficile, and Enterobacteriaceae were monitored using both methods. Total
clostridia were monitored by selective culture. Using qPCR analysis, we
additionally monitored populations of Prevotella spp., Clostridium coccoides
group, and Clostridium leptum group.
RESULTS: Both methods showed an exacerbation of disruption of the colonic
microbiota following vancomycin (and earlier clindamycin) exposure, and a quicker
recovery (within 4 days) of the bacterial populations in the models that received
the FMT. C. difficile proliferation, consistent with CDI, was also observed by
both qPCR and culture. Pearson correlation coefficient showed an association
between results varying from 98% for Bacteroides spp., to 62% for
Enterobacteriaceae.
CONCLUSIONS: Generally, a good correlation was observed between qPCR and
bacterial culture. Overall, the molecular assays offer results in real-time,
important for treatment efficacy, and allow the monitoring of additional
microbiota groups. However, individual quantification of some genera (e.g.
clostridia) might not be possible without selective culture.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-019-1669-2 
PMCID: PMC6941270
PMID: 31898476 

