
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Sep 16;329:108686. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108686. Epub 2020 May 26.

Effect of Lactococcus lactis expressing phage endolysin on the late blowing
defect of cheese caused by Clostridium tyrobutyricum.

Garde S(1), Calzada J(1), Sánchez C(1), Gaya P(1), Narbad A(2), Meijers R(3),
Mayer MJ(4), Ávila M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Tecnología de Alimentos, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), Carretera de La Coruña km 7, 28040
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Gut Microbes and Health Institute Strategic Programme, Quadram Institute
Bioscience, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UQ, UK.
(3)Institute for Protein Innovation, 4 Blackfan Circle Rm921, Boston, MA 02115,
United States.
(4)Gut Microbes and Health Institute Strategic Programme, Quadram Institute
Bioscience, Colney, Norwich NR4 7UQ, UK. Electronic address:
melinda.mayer@quadram.ac.uk.
(5)Departamento de Tecnología de Alimentos, Instituto Nacional de Investigación y
Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA), Carretera de La Coruña km 7, 28040
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: arribas@inia.es.

Erratum in
    Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Oct 16;331:108794.

Clostridium tyrobutyricum has been identified as a major species associated with 
the late blowing defect (LBD) of semi-hard and hard cheeses, due to undesirable
butyric acid fermentation. To find new strategies to control this spoilage
bacterium, we investigated the delivery of a bacteriophage endolysin by a cheese 
starter culture. The nisin producer Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis INIA 415 was
engineered to produce the CTP1L endolysin, encoded by the virulent bacteriophage 
ΦCTP1 of C. tyrobutyricum and with a demonstrated lytic activity in vitro, to the
cheese matrix. The presence of the nisRK two-component regulatory system in the
host strain allowed constitutive expression of the endolysin under the control of
the nisA promoter (PnisA), while the use of a signal peptide (SLPmod) led to
successful secretion of the active endolysin to the surrounding media. Engineered
lysins with a second cell wall binding domain were also tested and shown to have 
improved lytic activity. Transformation of L. lactis subsp. lactis INIA 415 with 
endolysin delivery plasmids had a detrimental effect on its ability to produce
nisin in milk, but did not affect its acidifying capacity. Transformed L. lactis 
subsp. lactis INIA 415 were evaluated as starters in cheeses contaminated with
spores of C. tyrobutyricum. Evolution of microbiological parameters, pH and dry
matter of cheeses were studied, and Clostridium metabolism and LBD in cheeses
were monitored by sensory and instrumental analyses during ripening. Cheese made 
with the parental strain L. lactis subsp. lactis INIA 415 delayed LBD by one
month, attributable to the activity of the nisin, but it was not sufficient to
arrest the growth of C. tyrobutyricum during ripening completely. The use of the 
endolysin-producing strains in cheese manufacture as single cultures also delayed
the appearance of LBD by one month, attributable to the activity of the endolysin
produced in situ during ripening, because nisin activity in these cheeses was
very low at day 1 and undetectable from 15 days onwards. Endolysin was more
effective than nisin in inhibiting Clostridium growth, since cheeses made with
the CTP1L or the chimeric derivative producers only as starters showed lower LBD 
symptoms, higher lactic acid levels and lower concentrations of propionic and
butyric acids (associated with off-flavours) than cheese made with the parental
strain. Investigation of different promoters to maximise endolysin production may
help to implement CTP1L as a tool to control C. tyrobutyricum by L. lactis cheese
starter and reduce LBD even further.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108686 
PMID: 32516659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

