
1. J Clin Invest. 2020 Aug 3;130(8):4019-4024. doi: 10.1172/JCI133605.

Gut microbiome communication with bone marrow regulates susceptibility to
amebiasis.

Burgess SL(1), Leslie JL(1), Uddin J(1), Oakland DN(1), Gilchrist C(1), Moreau
GB(1), Watanabe K(1)(2), Saleh M(1), Simpson M(1), Thompson BA(1), Auble DT(3),
Turner SD(4), Giallourou N(5), Swann J(5), Pu Z(6)(7), Ma JZ(6)(7), Haque R(8),
Petri WA Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of
Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia,
USA.
(2)AIDS Clinical Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine,
Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and.
(4)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia School of
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(5)Division of Integrative Systems Medicine and Digestive Diseases, Imperial
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Statistics and.
(7)Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia, USA.
(8)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

The microbiome provides resistance to infection. However, the underlying
mechanisms are poorly understood. We demonstrate that colonization with the
intestinal bacterium Clostridium scindens protects from Entamoeba histolytica
colitis via innate immunity. Introduction of C. scindens into the gut microbiota 
epigenetically altered and expanded bone marrow granulocyte-monocyte progenitors 
(GMPs) and resulted in increased intestinal neutrophils with subsequent challenge
with E. histolytica. Introduction of C. scindens alone was sufficient to expand
GMPs in gnotobiotic mice. Adoptive transfer of bone marrow from C.
scindens-colonized mice into naive mice protected against amebic colitis and
increased intestinal neutrophils. Children without E. histolytica diarrhea also
had a higher abundance of Lachnoclostridia. Lachnoclostridia C. scindens can
metabolize the bile salt cholate, so we measured deoxycholate and discovered that
it was increased in the sera of C. scindens-colonized specific pathogen-free and 
gnotobiotic mice, as well as in children protected from amebiasis. Administration
of deoxycholate alone increased GMPs and provided protection from amebiasis. We
elucidated a mechanism by which C. scindens and the microbially metabolized bile 
salt deoxycholic acid alter hematopoietic precursors and provide innate
protection from later infection with E. histolytica.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI133605 
PMCID: PMC7410058
PMID: 32369444 

