
1. Ann Palliat Med. 2020 Sep 7. pii: apm-20-1131. doi: 10.21037/apm-20-1131. [Epub
ahead of print]

Acute hemorrhagic necrotizing enteritis: a case report and review of the
literature.

Zeng S(1), Tsia Hin Fong CJ(1), Li L(1), Liang Y(1), Liang Q(2), Wei B(3), Tao
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun YatSen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun YatSen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun
YatSen University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun YatSen
University, Guangzhou, China. taojin3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Acute hemorrhagic necrotizing enteritis (AHNE) is a potentially fatal infection, 
triggered by beta toxin produced by Clostridium perfringens type C and
characterized by extensive hemorrhagic, inflammatory, or ischemic necrosis that
mainly affects the small bowel, clinically presenting as diarrhea, hematochezia, 
abdominal pain and hypotensive shock. AHNE is rarely reported in humans nowadays,
we present a case of AHNE in a 51-year-old man presenting as watery diarrhea,
hematochezia and abdominal pain along with shortness of breath who unfortunately 
died of the disease despite active medical treatment and multiple surgical
interventions. We aim to improve awareness of clinicians on this fulminant
disease, associated with high mortality rates. This is the first case report that
attempts to summarize the pathogenesis, clinical characteristics, diagnostic
methods, treatment and prognosis of AHNE based on the current English literature.
AHNE, which is exceedingly rare in clinical practice, has been associated with
poorly specific clinical manifestations, high rates of misdiagnosis in its early 
stages and mortality rates in severe cases. In patients with a history of
ingesting contaminated food and presenting with sudden progressively worsening
abdominal pain, diarrhea, hematochezia, accompanied by hypotensive shock or
ileus, AHNE should be highly suspected. In order to reduce the mortality of this 
disease, emphasis should be laid on early recognition and timely surgical
intervention in AHNE. In severe cases, death cannot be avoided despite adopting
active supportive treatment and timely surgical intervention.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-20-1131 
PMID: 32921115 

