
1. Int Immunol. 2020 Sep 8;32(9):597-603. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxz085.

Development of prime-boost-type next-generation mucosal vaccines.

Fujimoto K(1)(2), Uematsu S(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Division of Innate Immune Regulation, International Research and Development
Center for Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of 
Tokyo, Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University
of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Our bodies are constantly exposed to a wide variety of pathogenic micro-organisms
through mucosal sites. Therefore, effective vaccines that can protect at the
mucosa are vital; however, only a few clinically established mucosal vaccines are
available. Although conventional injectable vaccines can induce antigen-specific 
serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) and prevent severe infection, it is difficult to
efficiently inhibit the invasion of pathogens at mucosal surfaces because of the 
inadequate ability to induce antigen-specific IgA. Recently, we have developed a 
parenteral vaccine with emulsified curdlan and CpG oligodeoxynucleotides and
reported its application. Unlike other conventional injectable vaccines, this
immunization contributes to the induction of antigen-specific mucosal and
systemic immune responses. Even if antigen-specific IgA at the mucosa disappears,
this immunization can induce high-titer IgA after boosting with a small amount of
antigen on the target mucosal surface. Indeed, vaccination with Streptococcus
pneumoniae antigen effectively prevented lung infection induced by this
bacterium. In addition, vaccination with Clostridium ramosum, which is a
representative pathobiont associated with obesity and diabetes in humans, reduced
obesity in mice colonized with this microorganism. This immunization approach
might be an effective treatment for intestinal bacteria-mediated diseases that
have been difficult to regulate so far, as well as common infectious diseases.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2019. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxz085 
PMID: 31882997 

