
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Jul 15;13:2355-2364. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S257561.
eCollection 2020.

Evaluation of the Anti-Leishmanial Effect of Recombinant Clostridium α-Toxin.

Namdar F(1), Khanahmad H(2), Ghayour Z(1), Mirzaei F(3), Namdar A(4), Aghaei
M(5), Izadi S(6), Khamesipour F(7)(8), Hejazi SH(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shahid Sadoughi
University of Medical Sciences, Yazd, Iran.
(4)Department of Community Medicine, School of Medicine, Fasa University of
Medical Sciences, Fasa, Iran.
(5)Skin Diseases and Leishmaniasis Research Center, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(6)Department of Medical Parasitology and Mycology, School of Public Health,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(7)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Sabzevar University of Medical
Sciences, Sabzevar, Iran.
(8)Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(9)Skin Diseases and Leishmaniasis Research Center, Department of Parasitology
and Mycology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences,
Isfahan, Iran.

Background: Leishmaniasis is an infectious disease common in tropical and
subtropical regions caused by the genus Leishmania, which is transmitted by the
bite of female sandflies. In this study, we evaluate the anti-leishmanial effect 
of recombinant Clostridium α-toxin protein alone and the combination with
glucantime through in vitro and in vivo.
Materials and Methods: Production, expression, and purification of recombinant
α-toxin were evaluated by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting techniques. The
antileishmanial activities of the purified α-toxin plus and without glucantime
were examined in vitro and in vivo.
Results: The results indicated successful expression of α-toxin as a 48 kDa band 
on SDS-PAGE and Western blot methods. Also, evaluation of α-toxin IC50 showed the
strong fatal effect of it, and glucantime on medium proliferated Leishmania
promastigotes at lower concentrations compared with glucantime or α-toxin alone. 
Moreover, in vivo surveys showed that at the end of treatment courses, the mean
of lesion size diminished in glucantime plus α-toxin treated mice versus negative
control groups (p < 0.001). Also, there was a significant difference in the
parasite burden of the spleen and liver of the control versus the test groups (p 
< 0.001).
Conclusion: The results showed recombinant α-toxin has synergistic effects with
glucantime in destroying Leishmania parasites.

© 2020 Namdar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S257561 
PMCID: PMC7369417
PMID: 32765010 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests in
this work.

