
1. Circ Res. 2020 Jul 31;127(4):453-465. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.119.316448. Epub
2020 May 1.

Gut Microbiota-Derived Short-Chain Fatty Acids Promote Poststroke Recovery in
Aged Mice.

Lee J(1), d'Aigle J(1), Atadja L(1), Quaicoe V(1), Honarpisheh P(1), Ganesh
BP(1), Hassan A(2), Graf J(2), Petrosino J(3), Putluri N(4), Zhu L(5), Durgan
DJ(6), Bryan RM Jr(6), McCullough LD(1), Venna VR(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Neurology, McGovern Medical School (J.L., J.d'A., L.A.,
V.Q., P.H., B.P.G., L.D.M., V.R.V.), The University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Institute of Systems Genomics, The
University of Connecticut, Storrs (A.H., J.G.).
(3)Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Department of Molecular
Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX (J.P.).
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Dan L. Duncan Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Advanced Technology Core, Alkek Center for Molecular Discovery
(N.P.), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.
(5)Biostatistics and Epidemiology Research Design Core, Center for Clinical and
Translational Sciences (L.Z.), The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology (D.J.D., R.M.B.), Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX.

RATIONALE: The elderly experience profound systemic responses after stroke, which
contribute to higher mortality and more severe long-term disability. Recent
studies have revealed that stroke outcomes can be influenced by the composition
of gut microbiome. However, the potential benefits of manipulating the gut
microbiome after injury is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if restoring youthful gut microbiota after stroke aids in
recovery in aged subjects, we altered the gut microbiome through young fecal
transplant gavage in aged mice after experimental stroke. Further, the effect of 
direct enrichment of selective bacteria producing short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs)
was tested as a more targeted and refined microbiome therapy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Aged male mice (18-20 months) were subjected to ischemic
stroke by middle cerebral artery occlusion. We performed fecal transplant gavage 
3 days after middle cerebral artery occlusion using young donor biome (2-3
months) or aged biome (18-20 months). At day 14 after stroke, aged stroke mice
receiving young fecal transplant gavage had less behavioral impairment, and
reduced brain and gut inflammation. Based on data from microbial sequencing and
metabolomics analysis demonstrating that young fecal transplants contained much
higher SCFA levels and related bacterial strains, we selected 4 SCFA-producers
(Bifidobacterium longum, Clostridium symbiosum, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and
Lactobacillus fermentum) for transplantation. These SCFA-producers alleviated
poststroke neurological deficits and inflammation, and elevated gut, brain and
plasma SCFA concentrations in aged stroke mice.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study suggesting that the poor stroke recovery in 
aged mice can be reversed via poststroke bacteriotherapy following the
replenishment of youthful gut microbiome via modulation of immunologic,
microbial, and metabolomic profiles in the host.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.119.316448 
PMCID: PMC7415518 [Available on 2021-07-31]
PMID: 32354259 

