
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Sep 25. pii: jbc.RA119.012442. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012442.
[Epub ahead of print]

Peptidoglycan analysis reveals that synergistic deacetylase activity in
vegetative Clostridium difficile impacts the host response.

Coullon H(1), Rifflet A(2), Wheeler R(2), Janoir C(3), Boneca IG(4), Candela
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, France.
(2)Institut Pasteur, France.
(3)Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, France.
(4)Institute Pasteur, France.
(5)INRAE, AgroParisTech, Micalis Institute, Université Paris-Saclay, France.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic and spore-forming bacterium, responsible
for 15 to 25% of post-antibiotic diarrhea and 95% of pseudomembranous colitis.
Peptidoglycan is a crucial element of the bacterial cell wall that is exposed to 
the host, making it an important target for the innate immune system. The C.
difficile peptidoglycan is largely N-deacetylated on its glucosamine (93% of
muropeptides) through the activity of enzymes known as N-deacetylases  and this
N-deacetylation modulates host-pathogen interactions, such as resistance to the
bacteriolytic activity of lysozyme, virulence and host innate immune responses.
C. difficile genome analysis showed that 12 genes potentially encode
N-deacetylases, however, which of these N-deacetylases are involved in
peptidoglycan N-deacetylation remains unknown. Here, we report the enzymes
responsible for peptidoglycan N-deacetylation and their respective regulation.
Through peptidoglycan analysis of several mutants, we found that the
N-deacetylases PdaV and PgdA act in synergy. Together they are responsible for
the high level of peptidoglycan N-deacetylation in C. difficile, and the
consequent resistance to lysozyme. We also characterized a third enzyme, PgdB, as
a glucosamine N-deacetylase. However, its impact on N-deacetylation and lysozyme 
resistance is limited, and its physiological role remains to be dissected.
Finally, given the influence of peptidoglycan N-deacetylation on host defense
against pathogens, we investigated the virulence and colonization ability of the 
mutants. Unlike what has been shown in other pathogenic bacteria, lack of
N-deacetylation in C. difficile is not linked to a decrease in virulence.

Published under license by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.012442 
PMID: 32978253 

