
1. Transfus Med Hemother. 2020 Apr;47(2):144-151. doi: 10.1159/000501284. Epub 2019 
Jul 2.

Validation of Microbiological Testing of Cellular Medicinal Products Containing
Antibiotics.

Lotfi R(1)(2), Rojewski MT(1)(2), Zeplin PH(3), Funk W(4), Pullig O(5), Nöth
U(6)(7), Schrezenmeier H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Transfusionsmedizin, Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(2)Institute for Clinical Transfusion Medicine and Immunogenetics Ulm, German Red
Cross Blood Services Baden-Württemberg-Hessen, Ulm, Germany.
(3)Schlosspark Klinik Ludwigsburg, Privatklinik für Plastische und Ästhetische
Chirurgie, Ludwigsburg, Germany.
(4)Schönheitsklinik Dr. Funk, München, Germany.
(5)Department Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (TERM), University
Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(6)Evangelisches Waldkrankenhaus Spandau, Klinik für Orthopädie und
Unfallchirurgie, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, König-Ludwig-Haus, Center for
Musculoskeletal Research, Julius-Maximilians-University, Würzburg, Germany.

Background: The risk of microbial contamination of cellular products can be
reduced when cultured in the presence of antibiotics. This however, may impact
the sensitivity of microbiological tests. Given that the addition of antibiotics 
to cell/tissue products does not guarantee sterility but may just reduce the
proliferation rate of microorganisms, microbiological testing of medicinal
products remains obligatory. Thus, an appropriate method to test for microbial
contamination of antibiotic-containing products has to be validated.
Objectives: In the context of microbiological testing of a cellular advance
therapy medicinal product, the method was validated and approved by German
competent authorities for four different matrices with three matrices containing 
antibiotics. The paper shall provide help for establishing test methods for other
investigational medicinal products which contain antibiotics.
Methods: Matrices were spiked individually with Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus
subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus pyogenes, Escherichia coli,
Clostridium sporogenes, Propionibacterium acnes, Candida albicans, and
Aspergillus brasiliensis. Samples were pretreated with penicillinase for 1 h
before inoculation and incubation in BacT/ALERT iFA Plus and iFN Plus culture
bottles using 3D BacT/ALERT automates. Microorganisms within positive BacT/ALERT 
bottles were specified. The procedure was performed in two different laboratories
to prove robustness of test.
Results: All nine tested microorganisms were detected within 14 days of
incubation in accordance with requirements of the European Pharmacopoiea in terms
of sensitivity, specificity and robustness of the test. Penicillin and
streptomycin did not have any influence on specifications defined within the
investigational medicinal product dossier.
Conclusions: Culturing cellular products in the presence of antibiotics can serve
as an effective method to reduce contamination risk but only if the chosen
antibiotics neither have any influence on specifications of the investigational
medicinal product nor interfere with microbiological tests. Consequently, cells
and tissues primarily contaminated with microorganisms, like placenta, may be
considered as a source of cellular therapeutics when cultured for a sufficient
time with antibiotics and tested with a validated method. The choice of
microorganisms for the validation of the microbiological test should always
consider all conceivable scenarios and should not be reduced to minimal criteria 
defined in European Pharmacopoiea, wrongfully believing to thus save time and
effort.

Copyright © 2019 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000501284 
PMCID: PMC7184824
PMID: 32355474 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.

