
1. Food Funct. 2019 Oct 16;10(10):6699-6710. doi: 10.1039/c9fo00654k.

Clostridium tyrobutyricum alleviates Staphylococcus aureus-induced endometritis
in mice by inhibiting endometrial barrier disruption and inflammatory response.

Hu X (1), Guo J , Xu M , Jiang P , Yuan X , Zhao C , Maimai T , Cao Y , Zhang N ,
Fu Y .

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, People's Republic of China.
fuyunhesky@sina.com.

Endometritis is an inflammatory disease of the uterus caused by bacterial
infection, and it affects both human and animal health. This study aims to
investigate the protective effects and molecular mechanisms of probiotics such as
Clostridium tyrobutyricum (C. tyrobutyricum) on Staphylococcus aureus (S.
aureus)-induced endometritis. The results showed that S. aureus infection
significantly induced the pathological damage of the uterus, increased the
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α and IL-1β, and attenuated
the expression of tight junction proteins of uterine tissues. However, C.
tyrobutyricum pretreatment obviously reduced the inflammatory response and
reversed the changes of tight junction proteins of the uterus induced by S.
aureus. Together, the data showed that C. tyrobutyricum also inhibited the
expression of the TLR2/NF-κB signaling pathway and HDAC induced by S. aureus. In 
addition, the treatment of mice with live C. tyrobutyricum, spent culture
supernatants (SCS) from C. tyrobutyricum, rather than inactive C. tyrobutyricum, 
inhibited the inflammatory response induced by S. aureus. Through further
research, we found that the levels of butyrate in both blood and uterine tissues 
of mice treated with C. tyrobutyricum were significantly increased. These
findings underscore the protective effect of C. tyrobutyricum on endometritis by 
enhancing the uterus barrier integrity and inhibiting the inflammatory response. 
The anti-inflammatory mechanism may occur through the regulation of the
expression of TLR2/NF-κB and HDAC, and C. tyrobutyricum can be a potentially
therapeutic candidate for the treatment of endometritis.

DOI: 10.1039/c9fo00654k 
PMID: 31559977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

