
1. BMC Vet Res. 2020 May 24;16(1):152. doi: 10.1186/s12917-020-02362-y.

Fatal Clostridium sordellii-mediated hemorrhagic and necrotizing
gastroenteropathy in a dog: case report.

Capewell P(1), Rupp A(2), Fuentes M(2), McDonald M(2), Weir W(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, Institute of Biodiversity
Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Urquhart Building,
464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, UK. paul.capewell@glasgow.ac.uk.
(2)College of Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, Institute of Biodiversity
Animal Health and Comparative Medicine, University of Glasgow, Urquhart Building,
464 Bearsden Road, Glasgow, G61 1QH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Canine hemorrhagic gastroenteritis (also canine gastrointestinal
hemorrhagic syndrome) is commonly associated with Clostridium perfringens,
although in some cases the etiology remains unclear. This report describes a
fatal acute hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in a dog associated
with Clostridium sordellii, a bacterial species never before identified as the
etiological agent of hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in dogs.
CASE PRESENTATION: A fully vaccinated, eight-year-old, female neutered Labrador
presented with a history of vomiting without diarrhea. Clinical examination
revealed pink mucous membranes, adequate hydration, normothermia, and
normocardia. The dog was discovered deceased the following day. Post-mortem
examination showed moderate amounts of dark red, non-clotted fluid within the
stomach that extended into the jejunum. Discoloration was noted in the gastric
mucosa, liver, lungs, and kidneys, with small petechial hemorrhages present in
the endocardium over the right heart base and thymic remnants. Histological
analysis demonstrated that the gastric fundic mucosa, the pyloric region, small
intestine, and large intestine exhibited superficial coagulative necrosis and
were lined with a layer of short Gram-positive rods. Anaerobic culture of the
gastric content revealed C. sordellii as the dominant bacterial species and
neither Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., C. perfringens, nor C. difficile
were isolated. Unexpectedly, whole genome sequencing of the C. sordellii isolate 
showed that it lacked the main plasmid-encoded virulence factors typical of the
species, indicating that the genetic determinants of pathogenicity of this strain
must be chromosomally encoded. Further phylogenetic analysis revealed it to be
genetically similar to C. sordellii isolates associated with gastroenteric
disease in livestock, indicating that the infection may have been acquired from
the environment.
CONCLUSIONS: This case demonstrates that C. sordellii can associate with a canine
hemorrhagic and necrotizing gastroenteropathy in the absence of C. perfringens
and illustrates the benefits of using bacterial whole genome sequencing to
support pathological investigations in veterinary diagnostics. These data also
update the molecular phylogeny of C. sordellii, indicating a possible pathogenic 
clade in the environment that is distinct from currently identified clades.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-020-02362-y 
PMCID: PMC7245850
PMID: 32448314 

