
1. Toxins (Basel). 2019 Dec 30;12(1). pii: E17. doi: 10.3390/toxins12010017.

Public Health Risk Associated with Botulism as Foodborne Zoonoses.

Rasetti-Escargueil C(1), Lemichez E(1), Popoff MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Département de Microbiologie, Unité des Toxines
Bactériennes, 25 rue du Dr Roux, 75015 Paris, France.

Botulism is a rare but severe neurological disease in man and animals that is
caused by botulinum neurotoxins (BoNTs) produced by Clostridium botulinum and
atypical strains from other Clostridium and non-Clostridium species. BoNTs are
divided into more than seven toxinotypes based on neutralization with specific
corresponding antisera, and each toxinotype is subdivided into subtypes according
to amino acid sequence variations. Animal species show variable sensitivity to
the different BoNT toxinotypes. Thereby, naturally acquired animal botulism is
mainly due to BoNT/C, D and the mosaic variants CD and DC, BoNT/CD being more
prevalent in birds and BoNT/DC in cattle, whereas human botulism is more
frequently in the types A, B and E, and to a lower extent, F. Botulism is not a
contagious disease, since there is no direct transmission from diseased animals
or man to a healthy subject. Botulism occurs via the environment, notably from
food contaminated with C. botulinum spores and preserved in conditions favorable 
for C. botulinum growth and toxin production. The high prevalence of botulism
types C, D and variants DC and CD in farmed and wild birds, and to a lower extent
in cattle, raises the risk of transmission to human beings. However, human
botulism is much rarer than animal botulism, and botulism types C and D are
exceptional in humans. Only 15 cases or suspected cases of botulism type C and
one outbreak of botulism type D have been reported in humans to date. In
contrast, animal healthy carriers of C. botulinum group II, such as C. botulinum 
type E in fish of the northern hemisphere, and C. botulinum B4 in pigs, represent
a more prevalent risk of botulism transmission to human subjects. Less common
botulism types in animals but at risk of transmission to humans, can sporadically
be observed, such as botulism type E in farmed chickens in France (1998-2002),
botulism type B in cattle in The Netherlands (1977-1979), botulism types A and B 
in horses, or botulism type A in dairy cows (Egypt, 1976). In most cases, human
and animal botulisms have distinct origins, and cross transmissions between
animals and human beings are rather rare, accidental events. But, due to the
severity of this disease, human and animal botulism requires a careful
surveillance.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12010017 
PMCID: PMC7020394
PMID: 31905908 

