
1. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2020 Jul 6;11:73. doi: 10.1186/s40104-020-00480-z.
eCollection 2020.

Changes in the gut microbiota mediate the differential regulatory effects of two 
glucose oxidases produced by Aspergillus niger and Penicillium amagasakiense on
the meat quality and growth performance of broilers.

Wu S(1)(2), Chen X(1), Li T(1)(3), Ren H(1), Zheng L(1), Yang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi China.
(2)Center for Translational Microbiome Research, Department of Molecular, Tumor
and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Jiangxi Zhengbang Technology Co., Ltd., Nanchang, Jiangxi China.

Background: Glucose oxidase (GOD), an aerobic dehydrogenase, has been used as an 
antibiotic substitute in feed. A study was conducted to evaluate the differential
effects of 2 different GODs fermented by Aspergillus niger or Penicillium
amagasakiense on caecal microbiota and to further illuminate the potential roles 
of changes in the gut microbiota in regulating the growth performance and meat
quality of broiler chickens.
Results: A total of 420 one-day-old healthy Arbor Acres broilers were randomly
assigned to 4 treatments: the control group, the antibiotic growth promoter (AGP)
supplementation group, and the GOD-A and GOD-P (GODs produced by A. niger and P. 
amagasakiense, respectively) groups. As a result, supplementation with GOD
produced by P. amagasakiense could significantly improve the average daily weight
gain and average daily feed intake of broilers before 21 days of age by
significantly increasing the enzymatic activities of jejunal amylase and those of
ileal amylase, chymotrypsin, and lipase in 21-day-old broilers and could increase
the enzymatic activities of duodenal amylase, jejunal amylase and lipase, and
ileal chymotrypsin and lipase in 42-day-old broilers. Meanwhile, compared with
AGP treatment, supplementation with GOD produced by P. amagasakiense
significantly decreased the L value of 21-day-old broilers and the ΔpH and L*
value of 42-day-old broilers, while supplementation with GOD produced by A. niger
significantly increased the pH24 h value of 21-day-old and 42-day-old broilers by
reducing plasma malondialdehyde content. By using 16S rRNA sequencing, we found
that the beneficial bacteria and microbiota in broilers were not disturbed but
were improved by GOD supplementation compared with ADP treatment, including the
genera Eubacterium and Christensenella and the species uncultured_Eubacterium_sp,
Clostridium_asparagiforme, and uncultured_Christensenella_sp, which were
positively related to the improved intestinal digestive enzymatic activities,
growth performance, and meat quality of broilers.
Conclusion: The altered gut microbiota induced by supplementation with glucose
oxidase produced by P. amagasakiense mediate better regulatory effects on the
meat quality and growth performance of broilers than that induced by
supplementation with glucose oxidase produced by A. niger.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-020-00480-z 
PMCID: PMC7336442
PMID: 32647570 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.

