
1. BMC Vet Res. 2019 Oct 17;15(1):348. doi: 10.1186/s12917-019-2070-y.

Effects of insect diets on the gastrointestinal tract health and growth
performance of Siberian sturgeon (Acipenser baerii Brandt, 1869).

Józefiak A(1), Nogales-Mérida S(2), Rawski M(3), Kierończyk B(4), Mazurkiewicz
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Sciences and Infectious Diseases, Poznan University 
of Life Sciences, Wołyńska, 35, 60-637, Poznań, Poland.
agata.jozefiak@up.poznan.pl.
(2)Hipromine. S.A., Robakowo, Poland.
(3)Division of Inland Fisheries and Aquaculture, Institute of Zoology, Poznan
University of Life Sciences, Wojska Polskiego 71c, 60-625, Poznań, Poland.
(4)Department of Animal Nutrition, Poznan University of Life Sciences, Wołyńska
33, 60-637, Poznań, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Insects in the fish diet are a natural source of protein, fat, and
other nutrients. These meals are considered an ecological replacement for
fishmeal to improve growth parameters. The application of insect meals to fish
diets has been studied, especially in continental fish. Data regarding the
effects of insect meals on the gut health of Siberian sturgeon are not available.
This study investigated the effects of full-fat Hermetia illucens (HI) and
Tenebrio molitor (TM) meals on the gut health of juvenile Siberian sturgeon.
Growth performance, gastrointestinal tract (GIT) histomorphology and the
microbiome composition of juvenile Siberian sturgeon were analyzed.
RESULTS: The inclusion of insect meals did not affect the growth performance or
the survival rate. In the gastrointestinal tract histomorphology, a reduction in 
the mucosa thickness with the HI treatment was observed. In contrast, fish fed
the TM diet had an increase in the thickness of the muscular layer. There were no
observed significant differences in villus height among treatments. The analysis 
of the selected microbiota populations in the Siberian sturgeon gastrointestinal 
tract showed that insect addition affected the composition of the microbiome. The
greatest effect on bacterial populations (Clostridium leptum subgroup,
Enterobacteriaceae, Clostridium coccoides - Eubacterium rectale cluster,
Aeromonas spp., Bacillus spp., Carnobacterium spp., Enterococcus spp. and
Lactobacillus group) was observed with the HI diet (P < 0.05). The TM-based diet 
increased counts in the following bacterial groups: Clostridium coccoides -
Eubacterium rectale cluster, Bacillus spp., Carnobacterium spp., and Enterococcus
spp. In contrast, the TM diet decreased the total number of bacteria. The TM diet
did not significantly affect the Clostridium leptum subgroup, Enterobacteriaceae,
Aeromonas spp. or the Lactobacillus group.
CONCLUSIONS: Fish meal replacement by the inclusion of 15% of full-fat Hermetia
illucens and Tenebrio molitor (15%) meals did not affect the growth performance, 
survival rate or villus height of juvenile Siberian sturgeon. The present study
suggests that an H. illucens-based diet positively affects the gut microbiota
composition and intestinal morphology of juvenile Siberian sturgeon without
negative changes in the villus height.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-019-2070-y 
PMCID: PMC6798509
PMID: 31623627  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

