
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Mar 25;8(4). pii: E469. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8040469.

Soy Metabolism by Gut Microbiota from Patients with Precancerous Intestinal
Lesions.

Polimeno L(1), Barone M(2), Mosca A(3), Viggiani MT(2), Joukar F(4),
Mansour-Ghanaei F(4), Mavaddati S(4), Daniele A(5), Debellis L(6), Bilancia M(7),
Santacroce L(8), Di Leo A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Polypheno Academic Spin Off, University of Bari "A. Moro", 70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)Gastroenterology Unit, Department of Emergency and Organ Transplantation,
University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(3)Interdisciplinary Department of Medicine (DIM), University of Bari "Aldo
Moro", Policlinico, Piazza G. Cesare 11, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(4)Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases Research Center, Guilan University of
Medical Sciences, Rasht 41448-95655, Iran.
(5)Experimental Oncology, Scientific Institute for Cancer Care and Research IRCCS
"G. Paolo II", Viale Orazio Flacco, 65, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(6)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceuticals, University 
of Bari "Aldo Moro", Via E. Orabona 4, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(7)Ionian Department (DJSGEM), University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 74123 Taranto,
Italy.
(8)Ionian Department (DJSGEM), University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Microbiology and
Virology Lab., Policlinico University Hospital of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) requires the presence of a variety of factors
predisposing a tumorigenic milieu. Excluding familial clustering and hereditary
CRC syndromes, the development of sporadic CRC from precancerous lesions is
influenced by tissue inflammation, modulation of intestinal immunity, hormones,
dietary habits and gut microbiota composition. As concerning the last two
aspects, the intestinal presence of equol, the most biologically active
metabolite of the soy isoflavone daidzein and the presence of a genetic
determinant of gut microbiota able to metabolize daidzein, seem to lower the CRC 
risk. It has been hypothesized that the anaerobic microorganisms of the
Bacteroides genus play a role in equol production.
AIM: To evaluate the presence of (i) anaerobic gut microbiota and (ii) the
urinary levels of soy isoflavones (daidzein, genistein and equol) in patients
with and without precancerous lesions, challenged with a daidzein-rich soy
extract.
METHODS: Consecutive subjects undergoing colonoscopy participated to the study.
Feces were collected from all patients one week before colonoscopy for gut
microbiota studies. After the endoscopy examination and the histological
evaluation, 40 subjects, 20 with sporadic colorectal adenomas (SCA/P group) and
20 without proliferative lesions (control group) were enrolled for the study.
Urine levels of soy isoflavones daidzein, genistein and their metabolite equol,
were determined by high performance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) analysis and
gut microbiota analysis was performed by Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption
Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) procedure.
RESULTS: Seventeen different bacterial species were identified in the fecal
samples of the forty subjects participating to the study. Ten bacterial species
resulted anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria, all belonging to the Bacteroides
genus. A significant difference of bacteria species was evidenced in the fecal
samples of the two groups of subjects. Particularly important was the evidence of
Parabacteroides distasonis, Clostridium clostridioforme and Pediococcus
pentasaceus only in control fecal samples, such as the presence of Bacteroides
fragilis and Prevotella melaningenica only in SCA/P fecal samples. Concerning the
soy isoflavones levels, no statistically significant differences were revealed in
the genistein and daidzein urinary levels between the two groups of subjects. On 
the contrary, urinary equol levels were undetectable in ten SCA/P subjects and in
two controls; moreover, when present, the levels of urinary equol were
significantly lower in SCA/P subjects compared to controls (0.24 ± 0.27 mg/24 hrs
vs. 21.25 ± 4.3 mg/24 hrs, respectively, p = 1.12 × 10-6).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the presence of anaerobic Bacteroides in
the colon, and the production of equol from soy, could determine a milieu able to
contrast the development of colonic mucosa proliferative lesions.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8040469 
PMCID: PMC7232402
PMID: 32218321 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

