
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Jan;70(1):23-34. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003698.

Reclassification of the Clostridium clostridioforme and Clostridium sphenoides
clades as Enterocloster gen. nov. and Lacrimispora gen. nov., including
reclassification of 15 taxa.

Haas KN(1)(2), Blanchard JL(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, California State University Sacramento, Sacramento,
California, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of California Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, California, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts,
USA.
(4)Graduate Program in Organismal and Evolutionary Biology, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA.

The genus Clostridium belongs to the family Clostridiaceae. However, many species
with the genus name Clostridium are found in different families and even crossing
into a different phylum. Motivated by recently completed genome sequences, we
propose the reclassification of two separate clades that include misclassified
Clostridium species which phylogenetically lie within the family Lachnospiraceae,
known for being benign members of gut microbiomes and for their plant-degrading
capabilities. We use several phylogenetic and phylogenomic perspectives as well
as phenotypic comparisons to gain insight into the evolutionary history of these 
taxa. One clade, which includes Clostridium clostridioforme, Clostridium
aldenense, Clostridium asparagiforme, Clostridium bolteae, Clostridium citroniae 
and Clostridium lavalense, we propose to reclassify as Enterocloster gen. nov.,
and reclassify the species as Enterocloster clostridioformis comb. nov.,
Enterocloster aldensis comb. nov., Enterocloster asparagiformis comb. nov.,
Enterocloster bolteae comb. nov., Enterocloster citroniae comb. nov. and
Enterocloster lavalensis comb. nov. The other clade comprises Clostridium
sphenoides, Clostridium aerotolerans, Clostridium algidixylanolyticum,
Clostridium amygdalinum, Clostridium celerecrescens, Clostridium indolis,
Clostridium saccharolyticum, Clostridium xylanolyticum and Desulfotomaculum
guttoideum, and we propose to reclassify it as Lacrimispora gen. nov., including 
reclassification of the members as Lacrimispora sphenoides comb. nov.,
Lacrimispora aerotolerans comb. nov., Lacrimispora algidixylanolytica comb. nov.,
Lacrimispora amygdalina comb. nov., Lacrimispora celerecrescens comb. nov.,
Lacrimispora indolis comb. nov., Lacrimispora saccharolytica comb. nov. and
Lacrimispora xylanolytica comb. nov. We emend the description of D. guttoideum to
reflect that it is a later heterotypic synonym of Clostridiums phenoides, which
we have reclassified as Lacrimispora sphenoides.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003698 
PMID: 31782700  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

