
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Aug 21;8:772. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00772.
eCollection 2020.

Development of a Genome-Scale Metabolic Model of Clostridium thermocellum and Its
Applications for Integration of Multi-Omics Datasets and Computational Strain
Design.

Garcia S(1)(2), Thompson RA(2)(3)(4), Giannone RJ(2)(5), Dash S(2)(6), Maranas
CD(2)(6), Trinh CT(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States.
(2)Center for Bioenergy Innovation, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN,
United States.
(3)Bredesen Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Graduate Education, The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States.
(4)Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, United States.
(5)Chemical Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN,
United States.
(6)Department of Chemical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA, United States.

Solving environmental and social challenges such as climate change requires a
shift from our current non-renewable manufacturing model to a sustainable
bioeconomy. To lower carbon emissions in the production of fuels and chemicals,
plant biomass feedstocks can replace petroleum using microorganisms as
biocatalysts. The anaerobic thermophile Clostridium thermocellum is a promising
bacterium for bioconversion due to its capability to efficiently degrade
lignocellulosic biomass. However, the complex metabolism of C. thermocellum is
not fully understood, hindering metabolic engineering to achieve high titers,
rates, and yields of targeted molecules. In this study, we developed an updated
genome-scale metabolic model of C. thermocellum that accounts for recent
metabolic findings, has improved prediction accuracy, and is standard-conformant 
to ensure easy reproducibility. We illustrated two applications of the developed 
model. We first formulated a multi-omics integration protocol and used it to
understand redox metabolism and potential bottlenecks in biofuel (e.g., ethanol) 
production in C. thermocellum. Second, we used the metabolic model to design
modular cells for efficient production of alcohols and esters with broad
applications as flavors, fragrances, solvents, and fuels. The proposed designs
not only feature intuitive push-and-pull metabolic engineering strategies, but
also present novel manipulations around important central metabolic
branch-points. We anticipate the developed genome-scale metabolic model will
provide a useful tool for system analysis of C. thermocellum metabolism to
fundamentally understand its physiology and guide metabolic engineering
strategies to rapidly generate modular production strains for effective
biosynthesis of biofuels and biochemicals from lignocellulosic biomass.

Copyright © 2020 Garcia, Thompson, Giannone, Dash, Maranas and Trinh.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00772 
PMCID: PMC7471609
PMID: 32974289 

