
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Sep 25. pii: AEM.01795-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01795-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Metabolic fluxes of nitrogen and pyrophosphate in chemostat cultures of
Clostridium thermocellum and Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum.

Holwerda EK(1)(2), Zhou J(3), Hon S(3)(2), Stevenson DM(2)(4), Amador-Noguez
D(2)(4), Lynd LR(1)(2), van Dijken JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA. 
evert.k.holwerda@dartmouth.edu lee.r.lynd@dartmouth.edu.
(2)The Center for Bioenergy Innovation, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(4)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands.

Clostridium thermocellum and Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum were grown in 
cellobiose-limited chemostat cultures at a fixed dilution rate. C. thermocellum
produced acetate, ethanol, formate and lactate. Surprisingly, and in contrast to 
batch cultures, in cellobiose-limited chemostat cultures of T. saccharolyticum
ethanol was the main fermentation product. Enzyme assays confirmed that in C.
thermocellum glycolysis proceeds via pyrophosphate (PPi)-dependent
phosphofructokinase (PFK), pyruvate-phosphate dikinase (PPDK) as well as a malate
shunt for the conversion of PEP to pyruvate. Pyruvate kinase activity was not
detectable. In T. saccharolyticum ATP but not PPi served as cofactor for the PFK 
reaction. High activities of both pyruvate kinase and PPDK were present whereas
the activities of a malate shunt enzymes were low in T. saccharolyticum In C.
thermocellum glycolysis via PPi-PFK and PPDK obeys the equation glucose + 5 NDP +
3 PPi -> 2 pyruvate + 5 NTP + Pi. Metabolic flux analysis of chemostat data with 
the wild-type and a deletion mutant of the proton-pumping pyrophosphatase showed 
that a PPi-generating mechanism must be present that operates according to ATP + 
Pi -> ADP + PPi. Both organisms also produced significant amounts of amino acids 
in cellobiose-limited cultures. It was anticipated that this phenomenon would be 
suppressed by growth under nitrogen limitation. Surprisingly, nitrogen-limited
chemostat cultivation of wild-type C. thermocellum revealed a bottleneck in
pyruvate oxidation as large amounts of pyruvate and amino acids, mainly valine,
were excreted: up to 50% of the nitrogen consumed was excreted again as amino
acids.Importance This study discusses the fate of pyrophosphate in the metabolism
of two thermophilic anaerobes that lack a soluble irreversible pyrophosphatase as
present in Escherichia coli but instead use a reversible membrane-bound
proton-pumping enzyme. In such organisms the charging of tRNA with amino acids
may become more reversible. This may contribute to the observed excretion of
amino acids during sugar fermentation by Clostridium thermocellum and
Thermoanaerobacterium saccharolyticum Calculation of the energetic advantage of a
reversible pyrophosphate-dependent glycolysis, as occurring in Clostridium
thermocellum, could not be properly evaluated as currently available genome-scale
models neglect the anabolic generation of pyrophosphate in, for example,
polymerization of amino acids to protein. This anabolic pyrophosphate replaces
ATP and thus saves energy. Its amount is, however, too small to cover the
pyrophosphate requirement of sugar catabolism in glycolysis. Consequently
pyrophosphate for catabolism is generated according to ATP + Pi → ADP + PPi.

Copyright © 2020 Holwerda et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01795-20 
PMID: 32978139 

