
1. Microbiologyopen. 2019 Dec;8(12):e929. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.929. Epub 2019 Sep 4.

Comparative analysis of the composition and function of fecal-gut bacteria in
captive juvenile Crocodylus siamensis between healthy and anorexic individuals.

Lin M(1)(2), Zeng C(1), Li Z(1), Ma Y(1), Jia X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Engineering-Technology Research Center for Fishery Medicine, Fisheries
College, Jimei University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for the East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Xiamen, China.

The Siamese crocodile (Crocodylus siamensis) is a freshwater, endangered
crocodile with high economic value in the farming industry. Gut microflora plays 
an essential role in host physiological activity, and it contributes
significantly to both the health and diseased states of animals. However, thus
far, no study has focused on the correlation between diseases and intestinal
bacterial communities in crocodilians. Here, we first compared the composition
and function of gut microbial communities in captive juvenile C. siamensis
suffering from anorexia and healthy crocodile controls using deep amplicon
sequencing. The gut microbial diversity of anorexic crocodiles was much lower
than the healthy individuals. Obvious changes in gut microbial composition were
observed between sick and healthy crocodiles, except for Cetobacterium somerae of
phylum Fusobacteria. In particular, the abundance of Bacteroides luti,
Clostridium disporicum, Plesiomonas shigelloides, and Odoribacter sp. in the gut 
flora of healthy crocodiles was distinctly higher than the diseased group.
Conversely, the species Edwardsiella tarda was overrepresented in the gut of
anorexic crocodiles compared to the healthy group. Furthermore, in anorexic
crocodiles, the predicted microbial functions that were related to amino acid
metabolism, biosynthesis of other secondary metabolites, nucleotide metabolism,
replication and repair, and translation were significantly reduced, while signal 
transduction was significantly enriched. These findings of the present study
provide a reference to enrich the field of gut microorganism studies in
crocodilians and suggest that alterations in the composition and function of gut 
bacteria in C. siamensis juveniles may be associated with anorexia in crocodiles.

© 2019 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.929 
PMCID: PMC6925159
PMID: 31482690  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

