
1. Nature. 2020 Jul 30. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2605-1. [Epub ahead of print]

DNA targeting and interference by a bacterial Argonaute nuclease.

Kuzmenko A(1)(2), Oguienko A(3), Esyunina D(3), Yudin D(3)(4), Petrova M(3),
Kudinova A(3), Maslova O(3), Ninova M(5), Ryazansky S(3), Leach D(6), Aravin
AA(7)(8), Kulbachinskiy A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. 
dr.ant.kuz@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA. dr.ant.kuz@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(4)Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics, ETH
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
(6)Institute of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(7)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. 
aaa@caltech.edu.
(8)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA. aaa@caltech.edu.
(9)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. 
avkulb@yandex.ru.

Members of the conserved Argonaute protein family use small RNA guides to locate 
their mRNA targets and regulate gene expression and suppress mobile genetic
elements in eukaryotes1,2. Argonautes are also present in many bacterial and
archaeal species3-5. Unlike eukaryotic proteins, several prokaryotic Argonaute
proteins use small DNA guides to cleave DNA, a process known as DNA
interference6-10. However, the natural functions and targets of DNA interference 
are poorly understood, and the mechanisms of DNA guide generation and target
discrimination remain unknown. Here we analyse the activity of a bacterial
Argonaute nuclease from Clostridium butyricum (CbAgo) in vivo. We show that CbAgo
targets multicopy genetic elements and suppresses the propagation of plasmids and
infection by phages. CbAgo induces DNA interference between homologous sequences 
and triggers DNA degradation at double-strand breaks in the target DNA. The
loading of CbAgo with locus-specific small DNA guides depends on both its
intrinsic endonuclease activity and the cellular double-strand break repair
machinery. A similar interaction was reported for the acquisition of new spacers 
during CRISPR adaptation, and prokaryotic genomes that encode Ago nucleases are
enriched in CRISPR-Cas systems. These results identify molecular mechanisms that 
generate guides for DNA interference and suggest that the recognition of foreign 
nucleic acids by prokaryotic defence systems involves common principles.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2605-1 
PMID: 32731256 

