
1. J Affect Disord. 2020 Apr 1;266:394-401. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.01.137. Epub
2020 Jan 30.

Reduced anti-inflammatory gut microbiota are associated with depression and
anhedonia.

Mason BL(1), Li Q(2), Minhajuddin A(3), Czysz AH(2), Coughlin LA(4), Hussain
SK(4), Koh AY(4), Trivedi MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, United States. Electronic address: brittany.mason@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, United States.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, United States; Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States; Department of
Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United
States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, United States; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Characterise gut microbiota distributions of participants with
co-occurring depression and anxiety, in those with only depression or with
anxiety, and determine if gut bacteria differentially correlates with distinct
clinical presentations.
METHODS: Participants (10 healthy controls [mean age: 33, 60% female] and 60
psychiatric subjects; major depressive disorder (comorbid with anxiety), n = 38
[mean age: 39.2, 82% female], anxiety only, n = 8 [mean age: 40.0, 100% female], 
depression only without anxiety, n = 14 [mean age: 41.9, 79% female]) were
characterized by psychiatric assessments. Quantitative PCR and 16S rRNA
sequencing were used to characterize the gut microbiota in stool samples.
RESULTS: Altered microbiota correlated with pre-defined clinical presentation,
with Bacteroides (p = 0.011) and the Clostridium leptum subgroup (p = 0.023)
significantly different between clinical categories. Cluster analysis of the
total sample using weighted UniFrac β-diversity of the gut microbiota identified 
two different clusters defined by differences in bacterial distribution. Cluster 
2 had higher Bacteroides (p = 0.006), and much reduced presence of Clostridales
(p<0.001) compared to Cluster 1. Bifidobacterium (p = 0.0173) was also reduced in
Cluster 2 compared to Cluster 1. When evaluated for clinical charateristics,
anhedonia scores in Cluster 2 were higher than in Cluster 1.
LIMITATIONS: The sample is smaller and predominately female.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced or absent Clostridia was consistently seen in those with
depression, independent of the presence of anxiety. Conversely, reduced
Bacteroides may be more associated with the presence of anxiety, independent of
the presence of depression. These differences suggest that gut microbiota
distribution could help clarify the underlying pathology of comorbid clinical
presentation.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2020.01.137 
PMID: 32056905 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest B.L.M., Q.L.,
A.M., A.H.C., L.A.C., and S.K.H have no conflicts to declare. A.K.Y. is a
consultant for Merck. M.H.T. has no conflict of interest related to this project,
but is or has been an advisor/consultant to: Abbott Laboratories, Inc., Abdi
Ibrahim, Akzo (Organon Pharmaceuticals Inc.), Alkermes, AstraZeneca, Axon
Advisors, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Cephalon, Inc., Cerecor, Concert
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Eli Lilly & Company, Evotec, Fabre Kramer Pharmaceuticals,
Inc., Forest Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen Global Services, LLC,
Janssen Pharmaceutica Products, LP, Johnson & Johnson PRD, Libby, Lundbeck, Meade
Johnson, MedAvante, Medtronic, Merck, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Development
America, Inc., Naurex, Neuronetics, Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, Pamlab, Parke-Davis
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Pfizer Inc., PgxHealth, Phoenix Marketing Solutions,
Rexahn Pharmaceuticals, Ridge Diagnostics, Roche Products Ltd., Sepracor, SHIRE
Development, Sierra, SK Life and Science, Sunovion, Takeda, Tal Medical/Puretech 
Venture, Targacept, Transcept, VantagePoint, Vivus, and Wyeth-Ayerst
Laboratories. In addition, he has received research support from: Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), Corcept Therapeutics, Inc., Cyberonics,
Inc., National Alliance for Research in Schizophrenia and Depression, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institute on Drug Abuse, Novartis, Pharmacia
& Upjohn, Predix Pharmaceuticals (Epix), and Solvay Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

