
1. Toxins (Basel). 2020 Sep 11;12(9). pii: E586. doi: 10.3390/toxins12090586.

Diversity of the Genomes and Neurotoxins of Strains of Clostridium botulinum
Group I and Clostridium sporogenes Associated with Foodborne, Infant and Wound
Botulism.

Brunt J(1)(2), van Vliet AHM(3), Carter AT(2), Stringer SC(2), Amar C(4), Grant
KA(4), Godbole G(4), Peck MW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge,
Philippa Fawcett Drive, Cambridge CB3 0AS, UK.
(2)Gut Health and Food Safety, Quadram Institute, Norwich Research Park, Norwich 
NR4 7UQ, UK.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences,
University of Surrey, Guildford GU2 7AL, UK.
(4)Gastrointestinal Pathogens Unit, National Infection Service, Public Health
England, London NW9 5EQ, UK.

Clostridium botulinum Group I and Clostridium sporogenes are closely related
bacteria responsible for foodborne, infant and wound botulism. A comparative
genomic study with 556 highly diverse strains of C. botulinum Group I and C.
sporogenes (including 417 newly sequenced strains) has been carried out to
characterise the genetic diversity and spread of these bacteria and their
neurotoxin genes. Core genome single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis
revealed two major lineages; C. botulinum Group I (most strains possessed
botulinum neurotoxin gene(s) of types A, B and/or F) and C. sporogenes (some
strains possessed a type B botulinum neurotoxin gene). Both lineages contained
strains responsible for foodborne, infant and wound botulism. A new C. sporogenes
cluster was identified that included five strains with a gene encoding botulinum 
neurotoxin sub-type B1. There was significant evidence of horizontal transfer of 
botulinum neurotoxin genes between distantly related bacteria. Population
structure/diversity have been characterised, and novel associations discovered
between whole genome lineage, botulinum neurotoxin sub-type variant,
epidemiological links to foodborne, infant and wound botulism, and geographic
origin. The impact of genomic and physiological variability on the botulism risk 
has been assessed. The genome sequences are a valuable resource for future
research (e.g., pathogen biology, evolution of C. botulinum and its neurotoxin
genes, improved pathogen detection and discrimination), and support enhanced risk
assessments and the prevention of botulism.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins12090586 
PMID: 32932818 

