
1. Gastroenterology. 2019 Dec;157(6):1530-1543.e4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.021. Epub 2019 Aug 21.

Antigen-Specific Mucosal Immunity Regulates Development of Intestinal
Bacteria-Mediated Diseases.

Fujimoto K(1), Kawaguchi Y(2), Shimohigoshi M(3), Gotoh Y(4), Nakano Y(1), Usui
Y(5), Hayashi T(6), Kimura Y(5), Uematsu M(7), Yamamoto T(8), Akeda Y(9), Rhee
JH(10), Yuki Y(11), Ishii KJ(12), Crowe SE(13), Ernst PB(14), Kiyono H(15),
Uematsu S(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Division of Innate Immune Regulation.
(2)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Division of Innate Immune Regulation; Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.
(3)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Division of Innate Immune Regulation; Department of
Molecular Immunology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Division of Molecular Immunology, Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan; Division of Mucosal Symbiosis, International Research
and Development Center for Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Systems Immunology, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Department of Hematology, Osaka City University
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Division of Mucosal Symbiosis, International Research and Development Center
for Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Laboratory of Adjuvant Innovation, National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Vaccine Science,
World Premier International Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Division of Infection Control and Prevention, Osaka University Hospital,
Osaka, Japan; Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan; Department of Infection Control and Prevention, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Clinical Vaccine R&D Center, Chonnam National 
University Medical School, Gwangju, Republic of Korea.
(11)Division of Mucosal Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Laboratory of Adjuvant Innovation, National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Vaccine Science,
World Premier International Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan; International Research and Development Center for
Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan; International Research and Development Center for Mucosal Vaccines,
The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(13)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, La
Jolla, California.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Chiba
University-University of California, San Diego Center for Mucosal Immunology,
Allergy and Vaccines, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; 
Division of Comparative Pathology and Medicine, Department of Pathology,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; Center for Veterinary 
Sciences and Comparative Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California.
(15)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Chiba
University-University of California, San Diego Center for Mucosal Immunology,
Allergy and Vaccines, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; 
Division of Comparative Pathology and Medicine, Department of Pathology,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California; Department of Mucosal 
Immunology, IMSUT Distinguished Professor Unit, The Institute of Medical Science,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan; International Research and Development
Center for Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Department of Immunology and Genomics, Osaka City University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Osaka, Japan; Division of Innate Immune Regulation; Collaborative
Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. Electronic address: uematsu.satoshi@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Dysregulation of the microbiome has been associated with
development of complex diseases, such as obesity and diabetes. However, no method
has been developed to control disease-associated commensal microbes. We
investigated whether immunization with microbial antigens, using CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides and/or curdlan as adjuvants, induces systemic
antigen-specific IgA and IgG production and affects development of diseases in
mice.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were given intramuscular injections of antigens (ovalbumin,
cholera toxin B-subunit, or pneumococcal surface protein A) combined with CpG
oligodeoxynucleotides and/or curdlan. Blood and fecal samples were collected
weekly and antigen-specific IgG and IgA titers were measured. Lymph nodes and
spleens were collected and analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for
antigen-specific splenic T-helper 1 cells, T-helper 17 cells, and memory B cells.
Six weeks after primary immunization, mice were given a oral, nasal, or vaginal
boost of ovalbumin; intestinal lamina propria, bronchial lavage, and vaginal swab
samples were collected and antibodies and cytokines were measured. Some mice were
also given oral cholera toxin or intranasal Streptococcus pneumoniae and the
severity of diarrhea or pneumonia was analyzed. Gnotobiotic mice were gavaged
with fecal material from obese individuals, which had a high abundance of
Clostridium ramosum (a commensal microbe associated with obesity and diabetes),
and were placed on a high-fat diet 2 weeks after immunization with C ramosum.
Intestinal tissues were collected and analyzed by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Serum and fecal samples from mice given injections of antigens in
combination with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides and curdlan for 3 weeks contained
antigen-specific IgA and IgG, and splenocytes produced interferon-gamma and
interleukin 17A. Lamina propria, bronchial, and vaginal samples contained
antigen-specific IgA after the ovalbumin boost. This immunization regimen
prevented development of diarrhea after injection of cholera toxin, and inhibited
lung colonization by S pneumoniae. In gnotobiotic mice colonized with C ramosum
and placed on a high-fat diet, the mice that had been immunized with C ramosum
became less obese than the nonimmunized mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Injection of mice with microbial antigens and adjuvant induces
antigen-specific mucosal and systemic immune responses. Immunization with S
pneumoniae antigen prevented lung infection by this bacteria, and immunization
with C ramosum reduced obesity in mice colonized with this microbe and placed on 
a high-fat diet. This immunization approach might be used to protect against
microbe-associated disorders of intestine.

Copyright © 2019 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.08.021 
PMID: 31445037  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

