
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Sep 24. pii: jbc.RA120.015371. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.015371.
[Epub ahead of print]

Biosynthesis of the sactipeptide Ruminococcin C by the human microbiome:
Mechanistic insights into thioether bond formation by radical SAM enzymes.

Balty C(1), Guillot A(1), Fradale L(1), Brewee C(1), Lefranc B(2), Herrero C(3), 
Sandström C Jr(4), Leprince J(2), Berteau O(5), Benjdia A(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, France.
(2)Université de Normandie-Rouen, France.
(3)ICMMO, France.
(4)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Sweden.
(5)MICALIS, ChemSyBio, INRAE, France.

Despite its major importance in human health, the metabolic potential of the
human gut microbiota is still poorly understood. We have recently shown that
biosynthesis of Ruminococcin C (RumC), a novel ribosomally synthesized and
post-translationally modified peptide (RiPP) produced by the commensal bacterium 
Ruminococcus gnavus, requires two radical SAM enzymes (RumMC1 and RumMC2)
catalyzing the formation of four Cα-thioether bridges. These bridges, which are
essential for RumC's antibiotic properties against human pathogens such as
Clostridium perfringens, define two hairpin domains giving this sactipeptide
(sulfur-to-α-carbon thioether-containing peptide) an unusual architecture among
natural products. We report here the biochemical and spectroscopic
characterizations of RumMC2. EPR spectroscopy and mutagenesis data support that
RumMC2 is a member of the large family of SPASM-domain radical SAM enzymes
characterized by the presence of three [4Fe-4S] clusters. We also demonstrate
that this enzyme initiates its reaction by Cα H-atom abstraction and is able to
catalyze the formation of non-natural thioether bonds in engineered peptide
substrates. Unexpectedly, our data support the formation of a ketoimine rather
than an α,β-dehydro-amino acid intermediate during Cα-thioether bridge LC-MS/MS
fragmentation. Finally, we explored the roles of the leader peptide and of the
RiPP precursor peptide recognition element (RRE), present in myriad
RiPP-modifying enzymes. Collectively, our data support a more complex role for
the RRE and the core peptide for the installation of post-translational
modifications in RiPPs than previously anticipated and suggest a possible
reaction intermediate for thioether bond formation.

Published under license by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.015371 
PMID: 32972973 

