
1. Sex Med Rev. 2020 Oct;8(4):548-560. doi: 10.1016/j.sxmr.2020.04.003. Epub 2020
Jul 1.

A Review of Treatment-Related Outcomes in Female Partners of Men With Peyronie's 
Disease-An Opportunity for Improved Assessment.

Parikh NN(1), Heslop DL(1), Bajic P(2), Bole R(1), Farrell MR(2), Levine LA(2),
Ziegelmann MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Urology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address:
ziegelmann.matthew@mayo.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Peyronie's disease (PD) is a disorder of the penile tunica
albuginea, causing penile deformity, shortening, pain, and sexual dysfunction.
While studies have shown treatment efficacy for patients, research on
treatment-related outcomes for sexual partners is lacking.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to review the literature on clinical characteristics and
treatment-related outcomes from the perspective of female sexual partners of PD
patients.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive literature search of PubMed, Embase, and
MEDLINE databases to identify all studies pertaining to PD and partner
satisfaction through December 2019. 13 articles that discussed partner
satisfaction with treatments of PD including oral, intralesional, and surgical
therapy were found in the literature review.
RESULTS: At baseline, female partners of men with PD report lower sexual
satisfaction and dyspareunia. Results showed that intralesional injection of
collagenase Clostridium histolyticum resulted in partner satisfaction in
approximately 70% of patients based on differing definitions. Penile plication
demonstrated variable partner satisfaction ranging from 34% to 88% whereas plaque
incision or partial excision with grafting achieved rates ranging from 90% to
100%. Penile prosthesis implantation resulted in partner satisfaction rates
ranging from 40% to 75%.
CONCLUSION: PD has a negative impact on psychological and emotional well-being
for both patients and their female partners. Surgical and non-surgical treatment 
for PD has the ability to improve sexual satisfaction of partners. Studies
discussed focus on the various forms of treatment for men with PD; however, the
available studies were notably limited by small sample sizes, inconsistent use of
validated questionnaires, and lack of control groups. In addition, the topic of
partner satisfaction discussed in the articles mainly examined the response of
female partners and did not discuss effects of the disease on male partners.
Clinicians should consider carefully screening PD partners for sexual dysfunction
to optimize couple-focused therapy. Further studies are needed to evaluate
effects on male sexual partners of PD patients. Parikh NN, Heslop DL, Bajic P,
et al. A Review of Treatment-Related Outcomes in Female Partners of Men With
Peyronie's Disease-An Opportunity for Improved Assessment. J Sex Med
2020;8:548-560.

Copyright © 2020 International Society for Sexual Medicine. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sxmr.2020.04.003 
PMID: 32622886 

