
1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2019 Dec;49(3):474-484. doi:
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2019.05.007. Epub 2019 May 31.

A cross talk between dysbiosis and gut-associated immune system governs the
development of inflammatory arthropathies.

Kalinkovich A(1), Livshits G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Population Biology Research Unit, Department of Anatomy and
Anthropology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Human Population Biology Research Unit, Department of Anatomy and
Anthropology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
Electronic address: gregl@tauex.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Emerging evidence suggests that dysbiosis, imbalanced gut microbial
community, might be a key player in the development of various diseases,
including inflammatory arthropathies, such as rheumatoid arthritis,
spondyloarthritis (mainly, ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis), and
osteoarthritis. Yet, the underlying mechanisms and corresponding interactions
remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We conducted a critical and extensive literature review to explore the
association between dysbiosis and the development of inflammatory arthropathies. 
We also reviewed the literature to assess the perspectives that ameliorate
inflammatory arthropathies by manipulating the microbiota with probiotics,
prebiotics or fecal microbiota transplantation.
RESULTS: Some bacterial species (e.g. Prevotella, Citrobacter rodentium,
Collinsella aerofaciens, Segmented filamentous bacteria) participate in the
creation of the pro-inflammatory immune status, presumably via epitope mimicry,
modification of self-antigens, enhanced cell apoptosis mechanisms, and
destruction of tight junction proteins and intestinal barrier integrity, all
leading to the development and maintainance of inflammatory arthropathies.
Whether dysbiosis is an epiphenomenon or is an active driver of these disorders
remains unclear, yet, recent observations clearly suggest that dysbiosis precedes
and triggers their development implying a causative relationship between
dysbiosis and inflammatory arthropathies. The underlying mechanisms include
dysbiosis-mediated changes in the functional activity of the intestinal immune
cell subsets, such as innate lymphoid cells, mucosa-associated invariant T cells,
invariant natural killer T cells, T-follicular helper and T-regulatory cells. In 
turn, disturbed functionality of the gut-associated immune system is shown to
promote the overgrowth of many bacteria, thus establishing a detrimental vicious 
circle of actively maintaining arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the data described in the review supports the notion
that a close, dynamic and tightly regulated cross talk between dysbiosis and the 
gut-associated immune system governs the development of inflammatory
arthropathies.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2019.05.007 
PMID: 31208713  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

