
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2020 Mar 6;19(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s12934-020-01319-y.

Metatranscriptomic analysis to define the Secrebiome, and 16S rRNA profiling of
the gut microbiome in obesity and metabolic syndrome of Mexican children.

Gallardo-Becerra L(1), Cornejo-Granados F(1), García-López R(1), Valdez-Lara
A(1), Bikel S(1), Canizales-Quinteros S(2), López-Contreras BE(2), Mendoza-Vargas
A(3), Nielsen H(4), Ochoa-Leyva A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 2001, C.P. 62210,
Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico.
(2)Unidad de Genómica de Poblaciones Aplicada a la Salud, Facultad de Química,
UNAM/Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica (INMEGEN), México City, Mexico.
(3)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Secretaría de Salud, México City,
Mexico.
(4)Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology, Technical
University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
(5)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Avenida Universidad 2001, C.P. 62210,
Cuernavaca, Morelos, Mexico. aochoa@ibt.unam.mx.

BACKGROUND: In the last decade, increasing evidence has shown that changes in
human gut microbiota are associated with diseases, such as obesity. The
excreted/secreted proteins (secretome) of the gut microbiota affect the microbial
composition, altering its colonization and persistence. Furthermore, it
influences microbiota-host interactions by triggering inflammatory reactions and 
modulating the host's immune response. The metatranscriptome is essential to
elucidate which genes are expressed under diseases. In this regard, little is
known about the expressed secretome in the microbiome. Here, we use a
metatranscriptomic approach to delineate the secretome of the gut microbiome of
Mexican children with normal weight (NW) obesity (O) and obesity with metabolic
syndrome (OMS). Additionally, we performed the 16S rRNA profiling of the
gut microbiota.
RESULTS: Out of the 115,712 metatranscriptome genes that codified for proteins,
30,024 (26%) were predicted to be secreted, constituting the Secrebiome of the
gut microbiome. The 16S profiling confirmed an increased abundance in Firmicutes 
and decreased in Bacteroidetes in the obesity groups, and a significantly higher 
richness and diversity than the normal weight group. We found novel biomarkers
for obesity with metabolic syndrome such as increased Coriobacteraceae,
Collinsela, and Collinsella aerofaciens; Erysipelotrichaceae, Catenibacterium and
Catenibacterium sp., and decreased Parabacteroides distasonis, which correlated
with clinical and anthropometric parameters associated to obesity and metabolic
syndrome. Related to the Secrebiome, 16 genes, homologous to F. prausniitzi, were
overexpressed for the obese and 15 genes homologous to Bacteroides, were
overexpressed in the obesity with metabolic syndrome. Furthermore, a significant 
enrichment of CAZy enzymes was found in the Secrebiome. Additionally, significant
differences in the antigenic density of the Secrebiome were found between normal 
weight and obesity groups.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show, for the first time, the role of the Secrebiome 
in the functional human-microbiota interaction. Our results highlight the
importance of metatranscriptomics to provide novel information about the gut
microbiome's functions that could help us understand the impact of the Secrebiome
on the homeostasis of its human host. Furthermore, the metatranscriptome and 16S 
profiling confirmed the importance of treating obesity and obesity with metabolic
syndrome as separate conditions to better understand the interplay between
microbiome and disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-020-01319-y 
PMCID: PMC7060530
PMID: 32143621  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

