
1. Wound Repair Regen. 2019 Nov;27(6):598-608. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12752. Epub 2019 Aug
10.

Human macrophage response to microbial supernatants from diabetic foot ulcers.

Deusenbery CB(1), Kalan L(2), Meisel JS(3)(4), Gardner SE(5), Grice EA(3),
Spiller KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering Science and Health Systems, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, Wisconsin.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)The Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of
Maryland, College Park.
(5)College of Nursing, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

Diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) are a major clinical problem exacerbated by prolonged
bacterial infection. Macrophages, the primary innate immune cells, are
multifunctional cells that regulate diverse processes throughout multiple phases 
of wound healing. To better understand the influence of microbial species on
macrophage behavior, we cultured primary human monocyte-derived macrophages from 
four donors for 24 hours in media conditioned by bacteria and fungi (Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Corynebacterium amycolatum, Corynebacterium striatum, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Staphylococcus simulans, and Candida albicans) isolated from the DFUs of 
six patients. The effects of these microbe-derived signals on macrophage behavior
were assessed by measuring the gene expression of a panel of 25 genes related to 
macrophage phenotype, angiogenesis, bacterial recognition, and cell survival, as 
well as secretion of two inflammatory cytokines using NanoString multiplex
analysis. Principal component analysis showed that macrophage gene expression and
protein secretion were affected by both microbial species as well as human donor.
S. simulans and C. albicans caused up-regulation of genes associated with a
proinflammatory (M1) phenotype, and P. aeruginosa caused an increase in the
secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine and M1 marker tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNFα). Together, these results suggest that macrophages respond to 
secreted factors from microbes by up-regulating inflammatory markers, and that
the effects are strongly dependent on the monocyte donor. Ultimately, increased
understanding of macrophage-microbe interactions will lead to the development of 
more targeted therapies for DFU healing.

© 2019 by the Wound Healing Society.

DOI: 10.1111/wrr.12752 
PMID: 31343792  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

