
1. Infect Immun. 2020 Sep 18;88(10). pii: e00147-20. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00147-20.
Print 2020 Sep 18.

Niche- and Gender-Dependent Immune Reactions in Relation to the Microbiota
Profile in Pediatric Patients with Otitis Media with Effusion.

Enoksson F(#)(1), Ruiz Rodriguez A(#)(2), Peno C(2), Balcazar Lopez C(2),
Tjernström F(3), Bogaert D(2), Hakansson AP(4), Bergenfelz C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Helsingborg Hospital, Helsingborg, Sweden.
(2)Centre for Inflammation Research, Queen's Medical Institute, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, Experimental Infection Medicine, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.
(5)Department of Translational Medicine, Experimental Infection Medicine, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden caroline.bergenfelz@med.lu.se.
(#)Contributed equally

Otitis media with effusion (OME) is a common inflammatory disease that primarily 
affects children. OME is defined as a chronic low-grade inflammation of the
middle ear (ME), without any signs of infection and with effusion persisting in
the ME for more than 3 months. The precise pathogenesis is, however, not fully
understood. Here, we comprehensively characterized and compared the host immune
responses (inflammatory cells and mediators) and the overall microbial community 
composition (microbiota) present in matched middle ear effusion (MEE) samples,
external ear canal (EEC) lavages, and nasopharynx (NPH) samples from children
with OME. Female patients had significantly increased percentages of T
lymphocytes and higher levels of a wide array of inflammatory mediators in their 
MEE compared to that of male patients, which were unrelated to microbiota
composition. The relative abundances of identified microorganisms were strongly
associated with their niche of origin. Furthermore, specific inflammatory
mediators were highly correlated with certain bacterial species. Interestingly,
some organisms displayed a niche-driven inflammation pattern in which presence of
Haemophilus spp. and Corynebacterium propinquum in MEE was accompanied by
proinflammatory mediators, whereas their presence in NPH was accompanied by
anti-inflammatory mediators. For Turicella and Alloiococcus, we found exactly the
opposite results, i.e., an anti-inflammatory profile when present in MEE, whereas
their presence in the the NPH was accompanied by a proinflammatory profile.
Together, our results indicate that immune responses in children with OME are
highly niche- and microbiota-driven, but gender-based differences were also
observed, providing novel insight into potential pathogenic mechanisms behind
OME.

Copyright © 2020 Enoksson et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00147-20 
PMCID: PMC7504947
PMID: 32661126 

