
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 May 19. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0124. [Epub ahead of
print]

Resistance to Antiseptics and Disinfectants of Planktonic and Biofilm-Associated 
Forms of Corynebacterium striatum.

Souza C(1), Mota HF(1), Faria YV(1), Cabral FO(1), Oliveira DR(1), Sant'Anna
LO(1), Nagao PE(2), Santos CDS(1), Moreira LO(3), Mattos-Guaraldi AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Diphtheria and Corynebacteria of Clinical Relevance (LDCIC),
Faculdade de Ciências Médicas (FCM), Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro
(UERJ), The Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on
Diphtheria/National Health Foundation/Ministry of Health-FNS/MS, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(2)Departamento de Biologia Celular, Instituto de Biologia Roberto Alcântara
Gomes, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Farmácia, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.

Disinfection and antisepsis are of primary importance in controlling nosocomial
infections and outbreaks by pathogens expressing multiple resistance to
antimicrobial agents (multidrug-resistant [MDR]) used in therapy. Nowadays,
infections related to health services (HAIs) due to MDR and multidrug-susceptible
(MDS) Corynebacterium striatum should not be underestimated, including patients
using invasive medical devices. The virulence potential of C. striatum needs
further investigation. Currently, susceptibility profiles of planktonic and/or
sessile forms of four C. striatum strains of different pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis types were examined as biocides based on the manufacturer's
recommendations: 2% glutaraldehyde (GA), 2% peracetic acid (PA), 1% potassium
monopersulfate (Virkon®; VK), 1% sodium hypochlorite (SH), and 70% ethyl alcohol 
(ET). Time-kill assays using 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) were performed for
evaluation of influence of organic matter on biocides effects. Planktonic forms
expressed GA resistance at different levels. C. striatum viability was observed
until 2, 4, 20, and 30 min for MDR 2369/II, MDS 1954/IV, MDR 1987/I, and MDS
1961/III strains, respectively. In contrast to GA, the biocides PA, VK24h, SH,
and ET had higher effective bacterial mortality. However, storage of VK (48 hr)
reduced their biocide activities. Moreover, mature biofilms were produced on
abiotic substrates, including steel surfaces. Post-treatment with GA (30 min),
survival of sessile forms was ≥100% than planktonic forms of all C. striatum
tested strains. Independent of biocides tested, BSA increased the survival of
planktonic and sessile forms (p ≤ 0.005). Present data indicated that hospital
staff should be aware of dissemination and eradication of HAIs by C. striatum
presenting resistance to biocides, including high-level disinfectants, such as
GA.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0124 
PMID: 32429830 

