
1. Histopathology. 2020 Jun 17. doi: 10.1111/his.14187. [Epub ahead of print]

Cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis - a review of 12 consecutive cases.

Maung MH(1), Bethune GC(1), Patriquin G(1), Barnes PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Nova Scotia Health Authority 
and Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.

AIMS: Cystic neutrophilic granulomatous mastitis (CNGM) is an uncommon but
increasingly recognised cause of mastitis, often associated with Corynebacterium 
ssp. infection. We studied the histopathological and clinical features of CNGM in
a Canadian setting, and the work-up required to identify pathogenic
microorganisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A retrospective search for breast specimens with abscess,
acute, chronic and/or granulomatous inflammation from 1998 to 2018 was performed.
Haematoxylin and eosin slides were reviewed for typical histological features of 
CNGM. Histochemically stained slides for microorganisms were also reviewed.
Repeat Gram stains were performed if initially negative. Electronic medical
records were abstracted for microbiology results and relevant clinical data.
Twelve cases were identified. All were female, aged 25-57 years, mainly
Caucasian, with one Venezuelan and two of Chinese ethnicity. Most were parous (10
of 12); five of 12 had an endocrinopathy. Bacteria were identified in one or more
specimens from eight of 12 patients; additional Gram stains revealed organisms in
four of 12 cases. Of four bacterial cultures, one grew Corynebacterium
kroppenstedtii. 16S polymerase chain reaction for three samples was negative. Two
patients had multiple breast biopsies, showing early palisaded granulomas
followed by classic features of CNGM. The patients had various management
approaches, including surgery and antimicrobials.
CONCLUSIONS: CNGM may present as palisaded granulomatous inflammation, without
the expected 'cystic' pattern, suggesting that there is an evolution of
histomorphology with this infection. Most patients with CNGM are parous, and
there may be an association with endocrinopathies. Application of multiple Gram
stains increases the yield of microorganism identification. Recognition of CNGM
in breast biopsies and collaborative communications are essential to direct
appropriate therapy.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/his.14187 
PMID: 32557756 

