
1. Immun Inflamm Dis. 2020 Mar;8(1):62-79. doi: 10.1002/iid3.284. Epub 2020 Jan 7.

Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum, a human skin colonizer, induces the canonical
nuclear factor-κB inflammatory signaling pathway in human skin cells.

Altonsy MO(1)(2), Kurwa HA(1), Lauzon GJ(1), Amrein M(3), Gerber AN(4)(5),
Almishri W(6), Mydlarski PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Canada.
(2)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Science, Sohag University, Sohag, Egypt.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Corynebacterium tuberculostearicum (C. t.) is a ubiquitous
bacterium that colonizes human skin. In contrast to other members of the genus
Corynebacterium, such as toxigenic Corynebacterium diphtheriae or the
opportunistic pathogen Corynebacterium jeikeium, several studies suggest that C. 
t. may play a role in skin health and disease. However, the mechanisms underlying
these effects remain poorly understood.
METHODS: To investigate whether C. t. induces inflammatory pathways in primary
human epidermal keratinocytes (HEKs) and human cutaneous squamous carcinoma cells
(SCCs), cell culture, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, immunofluorescence microscopy, Western blot,
chromatin immunoprecipitation-PCR, small interfering RNA knockdown and luciferase
reporter expression system were used.
RESULTS: Herein, we demonstrate that C. t. upregulates the messenger RNA (mRNA)
and protein levels of inflammatory mediators in two human skin cell lines, HEKs
and SCCs. We further show activation of the canonical nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB)
pathway in response to C. t. infection, including phosphorylation of the
inhibitor of κB (IκB), the nuclear translocation of NF-κB subunit (NF-κB-P65 )
and the recruitment of NF-κB-P65 and RNA polymerase to the NF-κB response
elements at the promoter region of the inflammatory genes. Lastly, the data
confirm that C. t.-induced tumor necrosis factor mRNA expression in HEKs is
toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2 ) dependent.
CONCLUSION: Our results offer a mechanistic model for C. t.-induced inflammation 
in human keratinocytes via TLR2 and activation of IκB kinase and downstream
signaling through the canonical NF-κB pathway. Relevance to chronic inflammatory 
diseases of the skin and cutaneous oncology is discussed.

© 2020 The Authors. Immunity, Inflammation and Disease published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/iid3.284 
PMCID: PMC7016847
PMID: 31912662 

