
1. PeerJ. 2019 Nov 22;7:e8147. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8147. eCollection 2019.

Accumulation of di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate from polyvinyl chloride flooring into
settled house dust and the effect on the bacterial community.

Velazquez S(1), Bi C(2)(3), Kline J(1)(4), Nunez S(1), Corsi R(3)(5), Xu Y(3)(6),
Ishaq SL(1)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biology and the Built Environment Center, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR,
USA.
(2)Department of Civil Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University (Virginia Tech), Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(3)Department of Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering, University
of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(4)Energy Studies and Buildings Laboratory, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR,
USA.
(5)Fariborz Maseeh College of Engineering and Computer Science, Portland State
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(6)Department of Building Science, Tsinghua University (), Beijing, China.
(7)School of Food and Agriculture, University of Maine, Orono, ME, USA.

Di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) is a plasticizer used in consumer products and
building materials, including polyvinyl chloride flooring material. DEHP adsorbs 
from material and leaches into soil, water, or dust and presents an exposure risk
to building occupants by inhalation, ingestion, or absorption. A number of
bacterial isolates are demonstrated to degrade DEHP in culture, but bacteria may 
be susceptible to it as well, thus this study examined the relation of DEHP to
bacterial communities in dust. Polyvinyl chloride flooring was seeded with
homogenized house dust and incubated for up to 14 days, and bacterial communities
in dust were identified at days 1, 7, and 14 using the V3-V4 regions of the
bacterial 16S rRNA gene. DEHP concentration in dust increased over time, as
expected, and bacterial richness and Shannon diversity were negatively correlated
with DEHP concentration. Some sequence variants of Bacillus, Corynebacterium
jeddahense, Streptococcus, and Peptoniphilus were relatively more abundant at low
concentrations of DEHP, while some Sphingomonas, Chryseobacterium, and a member
of the Enterobacteriaceae family were relatively more abundant at higher
concentrations. The built environment is known to host lower microbial diversity 
and biomass than natural environments, and DEHP or other chemicals indoors may
contribute to this paucity.

© 2019 Velazquez et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8147 
PMCID: PMC6876486
PMID: 31772847 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

