
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Aug;129(2):319-334. doi: 10.1111/jam.14626. Epub 2020 Mar 
18.

Biokinetic aspects for biocatalytic remediation of xenobiotics polluted seawater.

Younis SA(1)(2), El-Gendy NS(1)(3), Nassar HN(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute, Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)Center of Excellence, October University for Modern Sciences and Arts (MSA),
6th of October City, Egypt.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, October University for Modern
Sciences and Arts (MSA), 6th of October City, Egypt.

AIMS: This research was conducted to investigate the biocatalytic remediation of 
xenobiotics polluted seawater using two biocatalysts; whole bacterial cells of
facultative aerobic halotolerant Corynebacterium variabilis Sh42 and its
extracted crude enzymes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: One-Factor-at-A-Time technique and statistical analysis were
applied to study the effect of initial substrate concentrations, pH, temperature,
and initial biocatalyst concentrations on the batch biocatalytic degradation of
three xenobiotic pollutants (2-hydroxybiphenyl (2-HBP), catechol and benzoic
acid) in artificial seawater (salinity 3·1%). HPLC and gas-chromatography mass
spectroscopy analyses were utilized to illustrate the quantitative removal of the
studied aromatic xenobiotic pollutants and their catabolic pathway. The results
revealed that the microbial and enzymatic cultures followed substrate inhibition 
kinetics. Yano and Koga's equation showed the best fit for the biokinetic
degradation rates of 2-HBP and benzoic acid, whereas Haldane biokinetic model
adequately expressed the specific biodegradation rate of catechol. The biokinetic
results indicated the good efficiency and tolerance of crude enzyme for
biocatalytic degradation of extremely high concentrations of aromatic pollutants 
than whole C. variabilis Sh42 cells. The monitored by-products indicated that the
catabolic degradation pathway followed an oxidation mechanism via a site-specific
monooxygenase enzyme. Benzoic acid and catechol were identified as major
intermediates in the biodegradation pathway of 2-HBP, which were then biodegraded
through meta-cleavage to 2-hydroxymuconic semialdehyde. With time elapsed, the
semialdehyde product was further biodegraded to acetaldehyde and pyruvic acid,
which would be further metabolized via the bacterial TCA cycle.
CONCLUSION: The batch enzymatic bioreactors performed superior-specific
biocatalytic degradation rates for all the studied xenobiotic pollutants.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The enzymatic system of C. variabilis Sh42 
is tolerable for toxic xenobiotics and different physicochemical environmental
parameters. Thus, it can be recommended as an effective biocatalyst for
biocatalytic remediation of xenobiotics polluted seawater.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14626 
PMID: 32118335  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

