
1. Food Res Int. 2020 Oct;136:109508. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109508. Epub 2020 
Jul 8.

The role of the general stress response regulator RpoS in Cronobacter sakazakii
biofilm formation.

Fernández-Gómez P(1), López M(2), Prieto M(2), González-Raurich M(2),
Alvarez-Ordóñez A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Hygiene and Technology, Universidad de León, León, Spain.
(2)Department of Food Hygiene and Technology, Universidad de León, León, Spain;
Institute of Food Science and Technology, Universidad de León, León, Spain.
(3)Department of Food Hygiene and Technology, Universidad de León, León, Spain;
Institute of Food Science and Technology, Universidad de León, León, Spain.
Electronic address: aalvo@unileon.es.

The relationship between biofilm formation and RpoS status was assessed in nine
field isolates of C. sakazakii. Their ability to form biofilms was studied in BHI
and minimum media with different pH values and supplemented or not with the amino
acids arginine, lysine and glutamic acid. Biofilm formation, both on polystyrene 
and stainless steel, was measured by spectrometric determination of the fixed
crystal violet and the biofilms were visualized by confocal laser scanning
microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. Despite the existing heterogeneity
among the different strains, biofilm formation was generally higher in buffered
minimum media (pH 7.0) supplemented with lysine than in other culture media and
on stainless steel plates than on polystyrene. The results showed a lower ability
to form biofilms for a strain with a loss-of-function mutation in the rpoS gene, 
the general stress response regulator of Gram-negative bacteria, when compared to
the rest of the strains, which harboured a functional rpoS. The complementation
of this strain with a functional rpoS gene resulted in an increase in its biofilm
formation ability up to levels comparable to those observed for strains with a
functional rpoS. However, the differences were markedly reduced when the
incubation time was increased from 24 to 48 h, indicating that the loss of RpoS
caused a delay in the development of mature biofilms, rather than a complete
inhibition of biofilm production in C. sakazakii.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109508 
PMID: 32846586 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

