
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Aug 16;327:108659. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108659. Epub 2020 May 11.

Labchip-based diagnosis system for on-site application: Sensitive and
easy-to-implement detection of single recoverable Cronobacter in infant formula
without post-enrichment treatment.

Cho TJ(1), Kim HW(2), Yoo C(3), Kim SW(3), Rhee MS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Korea
University, Sejong 30019, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 02841, South Korea.
(3)MiCo BioMed Co., Ltd., Gyeonggi 08511, South Korea.
(4)Department of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul 02841, South Korea. Electronic address: rheems@korea.ac.kr.

Microfluidic labchips have achieved much advancement in the molecular diagnosis
of foodborne pathogens. Whereas difficulties in the flow control during the
transportation of liquid fluids can occur and should be overcome. Manipulations
of reaction temperature and the complex procedures from sample pre-treatment to
analysis in a single chip device are major obstacles for the on-site application.
Thus, the efficient temperature control of samples without any flow of reaction
fluids in microfluidic channels of plastic chip and the simplest protocol
omitting post-enrichment processing steps may overcome these limitations
represented by the stability and the complexity, respectively. This study aims to
develop a novel type of labchip and thermocycler specialized for the gene
amplification in microfluidic channels and to evaluate the detectability by
sensing the minimum recoverable level of Cronobacter in powdered infant formula
(PIF). We developed a thermocycling device accelerating reactions through dual
heating-blocks optimized to control temperatures of samples in
microfluidic-channels by direct contact with labchip sequentially and
repetitively. The structural design of microfluidic channels was to eliminate
interference factors associated with the optical detection of fluorescent signals
(without distortion due to air bubbles in the reaction chamber). To improve the
applicability, a portable device and simplified operation to allow direct loading
of samples in the chip without post-enrichment procedures were also adopted.
Detection performance was evaluated by a sensitivity/specificity tests using 50
isolates of Cronobacter. Cross-reactivity tests for non-Cronobacter organisms and
gDNA [human, raw materials of PIF (cow, soybean)] showed that there was no
interference-factor causing false-positive results. In terms of the applied
research conducted by using PIF, the enrichment of samples without broth medium
(distilled water) displayed outstanding performance and 12 h of incubation
facilitated detecting target at concentration as low as 1 CFU/300 g PIF (as
initial contamination level) without post-enrichment treatment. Validation of the
operation conditions using 30 commercial PIF products was also consistent. The
present study presents a novel approach of microfluidic technology with
perspective to not only the performance and the practicability [easy-to-implement
protocol, portable materials, cost-effectiveness (the use of a miniaturized
plastic chip requires a minimum level of materials)] for on-site diagnosis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108659 
PMID: 32413591  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

