
1. Mol Plant Pathol. 2020 May;21(5):605-621. doi: 10.1111/mpp.12926. Epub 2020 Feb
25.

Bacterial wilt of dry beans caused by Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens pv.
flaccumfaciens: A new threat from an old enemy.

Osdaghi E(1), Young AJ(2), Harveson RM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Protection, College of Agriculture, Shiraz University,
Shiraz, Iran.
(2)School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, The University of Queensland, Gatton,
Queensland, Australia.
(3)University of Nebraska, Panhandle Research & Extension Center, Scottsbluff,
USA.

Bacterial wilt and tan spot of dry beans (family Fabaceae), caused by
Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens pv. flaccumfaciens, is an important emerging
disease threatening the edible legume industry around the globe. The management
of bacterial wilt has been a major problem since its original description in
1922. This is in part due to the seedborne nature of the pathogen allowing the
bacterium to be transmitted long distances via infected seeds, as well as a lack 
of detailed molecular information concerning the pathogenicity repertoires and
virulence determinates of the pathogen. Identification can also be difficult
owing to the presence of five different colony colour variants (i.e., yellow,
orange, pink, purple, and red) on culture media. In this review, we provide an
overview of the aetiology, epidemiology, and management strategies of bacterial
wilt disease. First, a comprehensive and comparative symptomology of the disease 
on different dry bean species is described. Then, the taxonomic history of the
causal agent and utility of high-throughput sequencing-based approaches in the
precise characterization of the pathogen is explained. Furthermore, we provide an
updated outline on the global distribution of the pathogen, highlighting
expansion of the causal agent into the areas with no history of the disease until
the beginning of the current century. Finally, because there are limited options 
for use of conventional pesticides against the pathogen, we highlight the use of 
integrated pest management strategies, for example quarantine inspections,
resistant cultivars, and crop sanitation, to combat the risk of bacterial wilt
disease in the dry bean industry.DISEASE SYMPTOMS: Interveinal chlorosis on
leaflets leading to necrotic areas and systemic wilt. Seed discolouration to
yellow, orange, pink, or purple is seen in white-seeded cultivars.
HOST RANGE: Causes bacterial wilt and tan spot disease on edible dry beans in the
Fabaceae family, including common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), cowpea (Vigna
unguiculata), mungbean (Vigna radiata), soybean (Glycine max), as well as a
number of weed species.
TAXONOMIC STATUS OF THE PATHOGEN: Bacteria; phylum Actinobacteria; order
Actinomycetales; suborder: Micrococcineae; family Microbacteriaceae; genus
Curtobacterium; species Curtobacterium flaccumfaciens.
SYNONYMS: Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens subsp. flaccumfaciens; Corynebacterium
flaccumfaciens pv. flaccumfaciens, Corynebacterium flaccumfaciens, Phytomonas
flaccumfaciens, Bacterium flaccumfaciens.
MICROBIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES: Multicoloured (yellow, orange, pink, purple, and
red), gram-positive, aerobic, curved rod, nonspore-forming, polar flagellated,
motile cells.
DISTRIBUTION: Widespread in America (Brazil, Canada, and the USA), Australia, and
Iran. Restricted occurrence in Africa and Europe.
PHYTOSANITARY CATEGORIZATION: EPPO A2 list no. 48, EU Annex II⁄B.

© 2020 The Authors. Molecular Plant Pathology published by British Society for
Plant Pathology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mpp.12926 
PMCID: PMC7170776
PMID: 32097989 

