
1. Z Naturforsch C J Biosci. 2020 Sep 8. pii:
/j/znc.ahead-of-print/znc-2020-0149/znc-2020-0149.xml. doi:
10.1515/znc-2020-0149. [Epub ahead of print]

Phytochemical characterization of different yarrow species (Achillea sp.) and
investigations into their antimicrobial activity.

Apel L(1), Lorenz P(1), Urban S(2), Sauer S(1), Spring O(3), Stintzing FC(1),
Kammerer DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Development & Research, WALA Heilmittel GmbH, Section
Phytochemical Research, Bad Boll, Eckwälden, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eberhard-Karls-University, Tuebingen,
Germany.
(3)Institute of Botany, Hohenheim University, Stuttgart, Germany.

Various Achillea species are rich in bioactive compounds and are important
medicinal plants in phytotherapy. In the present study, Achillea millefolium L., 
Achillea moschata Wulfen, and Achillea atrata L. were compared with respect to
their phenolic profile and antibacterial activity against gram-positive bacteria 
strains (Staphylococcus, Propionibacterium). Particular focus was given to
A. atrata, which has hardly been studied so far. Based on the metabolite profile,
A. atrata exhibited more similarities to A. moschata than to A. millefolium. The 
former two only differed in the occurrence of four compounds. The flavonols
syringetin-3-O-glucoside and mearnsetin-hexoside, not reported for an Achillea
species before, have been detected in A. atrata and A. moschata. All Achillea
species reduced growth of the tested bacteria. A. atrata demonstrated highest
activity against Propionibacterium acnes and Staphylococcus epidermidis, both
being involved in the pathogenesis of acne vulgaris. Furthermore, A. atrata has a
pronounced anti-methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus potential.
Bioassay-guided fractionation revealed that only the most polar fraction of
A. moschata displayed antimicrobial activity, which was attributed to phenolics
such as apigenin, centaureidin, and nevadensin, being present in high amounts in 
A. atrata. Thus, this alpine species shows promising antimicrobial activity and
might be a potential source for developing novel dermal/topical drugs.

DOI: 10.1515/znc-2020-0149 
PMID: 32897872 

