
1. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2020 Sep 5. doi: 10.1007/s40257-020-00556-6. [Epub ahead of
print]

Antibiotic Resistance in Acne: Mechanisms, Complications and Management.

Aslan Kayiran M(1), Karadag AS(1), Al-Khuzaei S(2), Chen W(3)(4), Parish LC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Istanbul Medeniyet University,
School of Medicine, Goztepe Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hamad Medical Corporation, Rumailah Hospital, Doha,
Qatar.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Technical University of Munich, Munich,
Germany. wenchieh65.chen@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Pingtung Hospital, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 
Pingtung, Taiwan. wenchieh65.chen@gmail.com.
(5)Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Center for International
Dermatology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Antibiotic resistance in acne was first observed in the 1970s, and since the
1980s has become a major concern in dermatologic daily practice. The mechanisms
for this type of resistance include biofilm formation that promotes virulence and
the transmission of resistant bacterial strains. Genetic mutations with
modification of ribosomal RNA, alteration in efflux pumps, and enzymatic
inactivation are able to create resistance to tetracyclines and macrolides. The
state of art in acne treatment is no longer to use antimicrobials as monotherapy.
There should be a time limit for its use plus the employment of non-antibiotic
maintenance. Earlier initiation of oral isotretinoin therapy should be considered
in patients with insufficient response to antimicrobials, severe acne, or a
history of repeated antimicrobial use. A better understanding of acne
pathogenesis, the subtypes of Propionibacterium (also known as Cutibacterium)
acnes, homeostasis of the skin microbiota, and the mechanisms of antibiotic
resistance would be useful in the selection of narrow-spectrum or
species-specific antimicrobials, as well as the non-antimicrobial,
anti-inflammatory treatment of acne. A number of novel treatments awaiting
clinical proof may include the use of bacteriophages, natural or synthetic
antimicrobial peptides, probiotics, and biofilm-targeting agents, as well as the 
reassessment of phototherapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s40257-020-00556-6 
PMID: 32889707 

