
1. Molecules. 2020 Sep 18;25(18). pii: E4277. doi: 10.3390/molecules25184277.

In Vitro and In Vivo Screening of Wild Bitter Melon Leaf for Anti-Inflammatory
Activity against Cutibacterium acnes.

Chuang LT(1), Shih YH(2), Huang WC(2), Lin LC(3), Hsu C(4), Chyuan JH(5), Tsai
TH(6), Tsai PJ(2)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Technology, Yuanpei University 
of Medical Technology, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, National Taiwan Normal
University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(3)National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, Taipei 112, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Exercise Health Science, National Taiwan University of Sport,
Taichung 404, Taiwan.
(5)Hualien District Agricultural Research and Extension Station, Hualien 973,
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Taipei Municipal Wan Fang Hospital and Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 116, Taiwan.
(7)Program of Nutrition Science, School of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal
University, Taipei 116, Taiwan.

Cutibacterium acnes (formerly Propionibacterium acnes) is a key pathogen involved
in the development and progression of acne inflammation. The numerous bioactive
properties of wild bitter melon (WBM) leaf extract and their medicinal
applications have been recognized for many years. In this study, we examined the 
suppressive effect of a methanolic extract (ME) of WBM leaf and fractionated
components thereof on live C. acnes-induced in vitro and in vivo inflammation.
Following methanol extraction of WBM leaves, we confirmed anti-inflammatory
properties of ME in C. acnes-treated human THP-1 monocyte and mouse ear edema
models. Using a bioassay-monitored isolation approach and a combination of
liquid-liquid extraction and column chromatography, the ME was then separated
into n-hexane, ethyl acetate, n-butanol and water-soluble fractions. The hexane
fraction exerted the most potent anti-inflammatory effect, suppressing C.
acnes-induced interleukin-8 (IL-8) production by 36%. The ethanol-soluble
fraction (ESF), which was separated from the n-hexane fraction, significantly
inhibited C. acnes-induced activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-mediated cellular IL-8 production. Similarly, the ESF protected against C.
acnes-stimulated mouse ear swelling, as measured by ear thickness (20%) and
biopsy weight (23%). Twenty-four compounds in the ESF were identified using gas
chromatograph-mass spectrum (GC/MS) analysis. Using co-cultures of C. acnes and
THP-1 cells, β-ionone, a compound of the ESF, reduced the production of IL-1β and
IL-8 up to 40% and 18%, respectively. β-ionone also reduced epidermal
microabscess, neutrophilic infiltration and IL-1β expression in mouse ear. We
also found evidence of the presence of anti-inflammatory substances in an
unfractionated phenolic extract of WBM leaf, and demonstrated that the ESF is a
potential anti-inflammatory agent for modulating in vitro and in vivo C.
acnes-induced inflammatory responses.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules25184277 
PMID: 32961947 

