
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 13;11:1852. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01852. eCollection 
2020.

Hop Extract: An Efficacious Antimicrobial and Anti-biofilm Agent Against
Multidrug-Resistant Staphylococci Strains and Cutibacterium acnes.

Di Lodovico S(1), Menghini L(1), Ferrante C(1), Recchia E(1), Castro-Amorim J(2),
Gameiro P(2), Cellini L(1), Bessa LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Farmacia, Università degli Studi "Gabriele d'Annunzio"
Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.
(2)LAQV/REQUIMTE, Departamento de Química e Bioquímica, Faculdade de Ciências,
Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal.

Bacteria belonging to Staphylococcus genus, in particular methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus and multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis,
together with Cutibacterium acnes are the main strains involved in skin disease. 
The increase in multidrug-resistant bacteria has revived attention on natural
compounds as alternative agents for the treatment management. Among these, hop
extract, a hydroalcoholic solution obtained from experimental crops of Humulus
lupulus L. variety cascade (hop), displays diverse biological properties
including an antimicrobial one. The aim of this study was to evaluate the
antimicrobial activity and the capacity to inhibit the biofilm formation of a
characterized hop extract against S. aureus and S. epidermidis
multidrug-resistant strains and against a C. acnes strain. The hop extract was
characterized by (i) phytochemical analysis through a reversed-phase
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-fluorimetric method, (ii)
biocompatibility test with Artemia salina L., (iii) cytotoxicity against two cell
lines, (iv) docking analysis, and (v) antimicrobial and antibiofilm activities by
detection of zones inhibition, minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs), biomass 
quantification, and cell viability. The hop extract was biocompatible and
non-cytotoxic at all tested concentrations. HPLC analysis revealed significant
levels of gallic acid, resveratrol, and rutin. This last compound was the most
representative displaying a high affinity against PBP2a and KAS III (Ki values in
the submicromolar range). The characterized hop extract showed a good
antimicrobial action with MICs ranging from 1 to 16 μg/mL and was able to inhibit
the biofilm formation of all tested strains, except for two S. aureus strains.
The biofilm formed in presence of the hop extract was significantly reduced in
most cases, even when present at a concentration of 1/4 MIC. The live/dead images
showed a remarkable inhibition in the biofilm formation by hop extract with a
weak killing action. Overall, the tested hop extract is a good candidate to
further explore for its use in the prevention of infection particularly, by
multidrug-resistant Gram-positive pathogens.

Copyright © 2020 Di Lodovico, Menghini, Ferrante, Recchia, Castro-Amorim,
Gameiro, Cellini and Bessa.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01852 
PMCID: PMC7438819
PMID: 32903686 

