
1. Cureus. 2020 Sep 1;12(9):e10184. doi: 10.7759/cureus.10184.

Synovitis, Acne, Pustulosis, Hyperostosis, Osteitis (SAPHO): An Interesting
Clinical Syndrome.

Hussain A(1), Gondal M(2), Abdallah N(3), Yousuf H(4), Iqbal M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Acute Medicine, Pinderfields General Hospital, Wakefield, GBR.
(2)Cardiology, The Mid Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust, Wakefield, GBR.
(3)Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Pinderfields General Hospital,
Wakefield, GBR.
(4)Oncology, Pinderfields General Hospital, Wakefield, GBR.
(5)Respiratory Medicine, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Sheffield, GBR.

Synovitis, acne, pustulosis, hyperostosis, and osteitis (SAPHO) syndrome is a
rare disorder that classically involves the musculoskeletal system, i.e. bone,
joint and skin. The exact pathogenesis of this syndrome is unknown. However,
autoimmunity, infections, immune malfunction and genetic factors are attributed
to its pathophysiology. Bone and joint involvements are the hallmark of SAPHO
syndrome and not necessarily require cutaneous involvement at the time of
diagnosis. X-ray of the affected joints could show osteitis with sclerosis.
Anterior chest wall involvement particularly ''bullhead appearance'' seen on bone
scan is a striking feature of the syndrome. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 
is usually elevated amongst the majority of patients. Diagnosis of SAPHO is
always challenging and often delayed because of a multitude of symptoms. The
mainstay of treatment is control of pain and inflammation with both non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and rescue courses of systemic steroids. If
failed to control symptoms with first-line agents and in those with severe
disease, disease-modifying anti-inflammatory drugs (DMARDs) may be needed
eventually. Despite a chronic inflammatory condition, it remains stable in the
majority of cases. Here in this case report, we reiterate the importance of early
recognition, timely diagnosis and prompt treatment initiation.

Copyright © 2020, Hussain et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.10184 
PMCID: PMC7465995
PMID: 32905195 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

