
1. Pol J Microbiol. 2020 Sep;69(1):99-108. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2020-013. Epub 2020 Mar
11.

Oligotrophic Nitrification and Denitrification Bacterial Communities in a
Constructed Sewage Treatment Ecosystem and Nitrogen Removal of Delftia
tsuruhatensis NF4.

Yang R(1), Li J(1), Wei-Xie L(1), Shao L(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Environment and Ecology, Chengdu University of Technology , China.

Oligotrophic nitrifiers and denitrifiers play important roles in the removal of
nitrogen from wastewater. Here, we studied the dominant bacterial populations of 
the sewage treatment ecosystem (STE) water from different processes and those of 
culture on oligotrophic heterotrophic nitrification (OHN) medium and oligotrophic
aerobic denitrification (OAD) medium, using co-analysis of Illumina HiSeq DNA
sequencing and traditional culture methods. The results showed that the STE water
had no dominant population of oligotrophic nitrifiers or oligotrophic
denitrifiers. However, after culturing on OHN medium and OAD medium, the core
genera Pseudomonas, Aeromonas, and Acinetobacter that have the nitrogen removal
capacity in oligotrophic environments, dominated in the bacterial community. The 
principal component analysis (PCA) showed that the bacterial community in the
constructed rapid infiltration (CRI) effluent water of STE had high similarity
with those of cultures on OHN medium and OAD medium, which prompt the special
purification role of nitrogen in the CRI system. The sodium alginate immobilized 
OAD bacteria strain Delftia tsuruhatensis NF4 was isolated from the CRI system,
with total nitrogen (TN) removal efficiency of 43.3% in sterilized STE influent
water, and 60.1% in OAD medium on day three. The immobilization significantly
influenced the TN and nitrate removal efficiency in OAD medium (p < 0.05), but
not in sterilized STE influent water (p > 0.05). This study would lay the
foundation for resource discovery of oligotrophic heterotrophic nitrifiers and
aerobic denitrifiers in STE and further functional application of them on the
bioremediation of wastewater.Oligotrophic nitrifiers and denitrifiers play
important roles in the removal of nitrogen from wastewater. Here, we studied the 
dominant bacterial populations of the sewage treatment ecosystem (STE) water from
different processes and those of culture on oligotrophic heterotrophic
nitrification (OHN) medium and oligotrophic aerobic denitrification (OAD) medium,
using co-analysis of Illumina HiSeq DNA sequencing and traditional culture
methods. The results showed that the STE water had no dominant population of
oligotrophic nitrifiers or oligotrophic denitrifiers. However, after culturing on
OHN medium and OAD medium, the core genera Pseudomonas, Aeromonas, and
Acinetobacter that have the nitrogen removal capacity in oligotrophic
environments, dominated in the bacterial community. The principal component
analysis (PCA) showed that the bacterial community in the constructed rapid
infiltration (CRI) effluent water of STE had high similarity with those of
cultures on OHN medium and OAD medium, which prompt the special purification role
of nitrogen in the CRI system. The sodium alginate immobilized OAD bacteria
strain Delftia tsuruhatensis NF4 was isolated from the CRI system, with total
nitrogen (TN) removal efficiency of 43.3% in sterilized STE influent water, and
60.1% in OAD medium on day three. The immobilization significantly influenced the
TN and nitrate removal efficiency in OAD medium (p < 0.05), but not in sterilized
STE influent water (p > 0.05). This study would lay the foundation for resource
discovery of oligotrophic heterotrophic nitrifiers and aerobic denitrifiers in
STE and further functional application of them on the bioremediation of
wastewater.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2020-013 
PMCID: PMC7256856
PMID: 32189483  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

