
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 May 19;86(11). pii: e00122-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00122-20. Print 2020 May 19.

Synergistic Effects of a Chalkophore, Methanobactin, on Microbial Methylation of 
Mercury.

Yin X(#)(1)(2), Wang L(#)(2)(3), Zhang L(2), Chen H(2)(4), Liang X(2)(5), Lu
X(2), DiSpirito AA(6), Semrau JD(7), Gu B(8)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Jinan Research Academy of Environmental Sciences, Jinan, China.
(2)Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Shandong Analysis and Test Center, Qilu University of Technology (Shandong
Academy of Sciences), Jinan, China.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Old Dominion University, Norfolk,
Virginia, USA.
(5)Department of Biosystems Engineering and Soil Science, University of
Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Roy J. Carver Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology,
Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, USA.
(7)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(8)Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge,
Tennessee, USA gub1@ornl.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Microbial production of the neurotoxin methylmercury (MeHg) is a significant
health and environmental concern, as it can bioaccumulate and biomagnify in the
food web. A chalkophore or a copper-binding compound, termed methanobactin (MB), 
has been shown to form strong complexes with mercury [as Hg(II)] and also enables
some methanotrophs to degrade MeHg. It is unknown, however, if Hg(II) binding
with MB can also impede Hg(II) methylation by other microbes. Contrary to
expectations, MB produced by the methanotroph Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b
(OB3b-MB) enhanced the rate and efficiency of Hg(II) methylation more than that
observed with thiol compounds (such as cysteine) by the mercury-methylating
bacteria Desulfovibrio desulfuricans ND132 and Geobacter sulfurreducens PCA.
Compared to no-MB controls, OB3b-MB decreased the rates of Hg(II) sorption and
internalization, but increased methylation by 5- to 7-fold, suggesting that
Hg(II) complexation with OB3b-MB facilitated exchange and internal transfer of
Hg(II) to the HgcAB proteins required for methylation. Conversely, addition of
excess amounts of OB3b-MB or a different form of MB from Methylocystis strain SB2
(SB2-MB) inhibited Hg(II) methylation, likely due to greater binding of Hg(II).
Collectively, our results underscore the complex roles of microbial exogenous
metal-scavenging compounds in controlling net production and bioaccumulation of
MeHg in the environment.IMPORTANCE Some anaerobic microorganisms convert
inorganic mercury (Hg) into the neurotoxin methylmercury, which can bioaccumulate
and biomagnify in the food web. While the genetic basis of microbial mercury
methylation is known, factors that control net methylmercury production in the
environment are still poorly understood. Here, it is shown that mercury
methylation can be substantially enhanced by one form of an exogenous
copper-binding compound (methanobactin) produced by some methanotrophs, but not
by another. This novel finding illustrates that complex interactions exist
between microbes and that these interactions can potentially affect the net
production of methylmercury in situ.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00122-20 
PMCID: PMC7237777 [Available on 2020-11-19]
PMID: 32220843 

