
1. mSystems. 2020 Aug 4;5(4). pii: e00457-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00457-20.

Formula Diet Alters the Ileal Metagenome and Transcriptome at Weaning and during 
the Postweaning Period in a Porcine Model.

Elolimy AA(1)(2), Washam C(3), Byrum S(3), Chen C(4), Dawson H(4), Bowlin
AK(1)(2), Randolph CE(5), Saraf MK(1)(2), Yeruva L(6)(2)(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(4)Diet, Genomics & Immunology Laboratory, USDA-ARS Beltsville Human Nutrition
Research Center, Beltsville, Maryland, USA.
(5)Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA.
(6)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, Arkansas, USA
vlyeruva@uams.edu.

Exclusive breastfeeding impacts the intestinal microbiome and is associated with 
a better immune function than is seen with milk formula (MF) feeding in infants
and yet with mechanisms poorly defined. The porcine model was used to evaluate
the impact of MF on ileum microbial communities and gene expression relative to
human milk (HM)-fed piglets. Fifty-two Dutch Landrace male piglets were fed an
isocaloric diet of either HM (n = 26) or MF (n = 26) from day 2 through day 21 of
age and weaned to a solid diet until day 51. Eleven piglets from each group were 
euthanized at day 21, while the remaining piglets (HM, n = 15; MF, n = 15) were
euthanized at day 51 to collect ileal epithelium (EP) scrapings and ileal (IL)
tissues. The epithelial mucosa was subjected to shotgun metagenome sequencing,
and EP and IL tissues were used for transcriptome analysis. On day 21,
transcriptome data revealed that the levels of pathways involved in inflammation 
and apoptosis were significantly higher in MF piglets than in HM piglets, whereas
the levels of tight junctions and pathogen detection systems were lower in MF
piglets than in HM piglets. The MF impacts on the small intestine were maintained
over the postweaning period (day 51) as indicated by higher levels of Dialister
invisus bacteria and higher levels of expression of genes associated with
inflammation and apoptosis pathways relative to HM group. The current study
demonstrated that MF might impact local intestinal inflammation, apoptosis, and
tight junctions and might suppress pathogen recognition in the small intestine
compared with HM.IMPORTANCE Exclusive human milk (HM) breastfeeding for the first
6 months of age in infants is recommended to improve health outcomes during early
life and beyond. When women are unable to provide sufficient HM, milk formula
(MF) is often recommended as a complementary or alternative source of nutrition. 
Previous studies in piglets demonstrated that MF alters the gut microbiome and
induces inflammatory cytokine production. The links between MF feeding, gut
microbiome, and inflammation status are unclear due to challenges associated with
the collection of intestinal samples from human infants. The current report
provides the first insight into MF-microbiome-inflammation connections in the
small intestine compared with HM feeding using a porcine model. The present
results showed that, compared with HM, MF might impact immune function through
the induction of ileal inflammation, apoptosis, and tight junction disruptions
and likely compromised immune defense against pathogen detection in the small
intestine relative to piglets that were fed HM.

Copyright © 2020 Elolimy et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00457-20 
PMCID: PMC7406227
PMID: 32753508 

