
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jun 19;11:1149. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01149. eCollection 
2020.

Inoculation With a Microbe Isolated From the Negev Desert Enhances Corn Growth.

Khan N(1), Martínez-Hidalgo P(1)(2), Humm EA(1), Maymon M(1), Kaplan D(3), Hirsch
AM(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell & Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Geology, Physics and Inorganic Chemistry, Universidad
Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Environmental Hydrology and Microbiology, Zuckerberg Institute
for Water Research, Jacob Blaustein Institutes for Desert Research, Ben-Gurion
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(4)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, United States.

Corn (Zea mays L.) is not only an important food source, but also has numerous
uses, including for biofuels, fillers for cosmetics, glues, and so on. The amount
of corn grown in the U.S. has significantly increased since the 1960's and with
it, the demand for synthetic fertilizers and pesticides/fungicides to enhance its
production. However, the downside of the continuous use of these products,
especially N and P fertilizers, has been an increase in N2O emissions and other
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere as well as run-off into waterways that fuel 
pollution and algal blooms. These approaches to agriculture, especially if
exacerbated by climate change, will result in decreased soil health as well as
human health. We searched for microbes from arid, native environments that are
not being used for agriculture because we reasoned that indigenous microbes from 
such soils could promote plant growth and help restore degraded soils. Employing 
cultivation-dependent methods to isolate bacteria from the Negev Desert in
Israel, we tested the effects of several microbial isolates on corn in both
greenhouse and small field studies. One strain, Dietzia cinnamea 55, originally
identified as Planomicrobium chinense, significantly enhanced corn growth over
the uninoculated control in both greenhouse and outside garden experiments. We
sequenced and analyzed the genome of this bacterial species to elucidate some of 
the mechanisms whereby D. cinnamea 55 promoted plant growth. In addition, to
ensure the biosafety of this previously unknown plant growth promoting bacterial 
(PGPB) strain as a potential bioinoculant, we tested the survival and growth of
Caenorhabditis elegans and Galleria mellonella (two animal virulence tests) as
well as plants in response to D. cinnamea 55 inoculation. We also looked for
genes for potential virulence determinants as well as for growth promotion.

Copyright © 2020 Khan, Martínez-Hidalgo, Humm, Maymon, Kaplan and Hirsch.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01149 
PMCID: PMC7316896
PMID: 32636811 

