
1. Nutr Res. 2020 May;77:97-107. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2020.04.001. Epub 2020 Apr
17.

Metabolic benefits of annatto-extracted tocotrienol on glucose homeostasis,
inflammation, and gut microbiome.

Chung E(1), Elmassry MM(2), Kottapalli P(3), Kottapalli KR(4), Kaur G(5), Dufour 
JM(6), Wright K(7), Ramalingam L(8), Moustaid-Moussa N(9), Wang R(10), Hamood
AN(11), Shen CL(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Health, and Nutrition, University of Texas at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX. Electronic address: eunhee.chung@utsa.edu.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
Electronic address: moamen.elmassry@ttu.edu.
(3)Hartwell Center, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
Electronic address: kottapallisri@gmail.com.
(4)AUA College of Medicine, Antigua, West Indies.
(5)Department of Medical Education, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, TX; Center of Excellence for Integrative Health, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Obesity Research Institute, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, TX. Electronic address: gurvinder.kaur@ttuhsc.edu.
(6)Department of Medical Education, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, TX; Center of Excellence for Integrative Health, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry,
Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Obesity Research
Institute, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX; Department of Immunology and
Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock,
TX. Electronic address: jannette.dufour@ttuhsc.edu.
(7)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX. Electronic address: kandis.wright@ttuhsc.edu.
(8)Center of Excellence for Integrative Health, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Obesity Research Institute, Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, TX; Department of Nutritional Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 
TX. Electronic address: latha.Ramalingam@ttu.edu.
(9)Center of Excellence for Integrative Health, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Obesity Research Institute, Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, TX; Department of Nutritional Sciences, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, 
TX. Electronic address: naima.moustaid-moussa@ttu.edu.
(10)Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center,
Lubbock, TX. Electronic address: rui.wang@ttuhsc.edu.
(11)Department of Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Department of Surgery, Texas Tech University
Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX. Electronic address: abdul.hamood@ttuhsc.edu.
(12)Center of Excellence for Integrative Health, Texas Tech University Health
Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX; Obesity Research Institute, Texas Tech University, 
Lubbock, TX; Department of Pathology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center, Lubbock, TX. Electronic address: leslie.shen@ttuhsc.edu.

Emerging evidence suggests that the gut microbiome plays an important role in the
pathophysiology of both obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus. We previously
reported that dietary annatto-extracted tocotrienol exerts beneficial effects by 
modulating inflammatory responses in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD). The purpose 
of this study was to test the hypothesis that tocotrienol supplementation when
combined with an HFD would result in an altered gut microbiota composition. For
14 weeks, forty-eight male C57BL/6J mice were assigned to 4 groups-low-fat diet, 
HFD, HFD supplemented with annatto-extracted tocotrienol at 800 mg/kg diet (AT), 
and HFD supplemented with metformin at 200 mg/kg diet. Glucose homeostasis was
assessed by glucose and insulin tolerance tests, serum and pancreas insulin
levels, and histological assessments of insulin and glucagon in pancreatic
tissue. The concentrations of adipokines were measured in white adipose tissues. 
For the gut microbiome analysis, cecal content was collected, DNA was extracted, 
and 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed. AT supplementation improved glucose
homeostasis and lowered resistin, leptin, and interleukin-6 levels in white
adipose tissue. Relative to the HFD group, AT-supplemented mice showed a decrease
in the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio and had a lower abundance of
Ruminococcus lactaris, Dorea longicatena, and Lachnospiraceae family. The
relative abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila was increased in the AT group
compared to the low-fat diet group. The association between the metabolic
improvements and the identified bacterial taxa suggests a potential metabolic
modulation caused by AT supplementation through the gut microbiota composition in
mice fed an HFD.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nutres.2020.04.001 
PMID: 32438021 

