
1. Elife. 2020 Feb 18;9. pii: e50845. doi: 10.7554/eLife.50845.

A widely distributed metalloenzyme class enables gut microbial metabolism of
host- and diet-derived catechols.

Maini Rekdal V(#)(1), Nol Bernadino P(#)(2)(3), Luescher MU(#)(1), Kiamehr S(1), 
Le C(1), Bisanz JE(4), Turnbaugh PJ(4)(5), Bess EN(2)(3), Balskus EP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
United States.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, United States.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, United States.
(5)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Catechol dehydroxylation is a central chemical transformation in the gut
microbial metabolism of plant- and host-derived small molecules. However, the
molecular basis for this transformation and its distribution among gut
microorganisms are poorly understood. Here, we characterize a
molybdenum-dependent enzyme from the human gut bacterium Eggerthella lenta that
dehydroxylates catecholamine neurotransmitters. Our findings suggest that this
activity enables E. lenta to use dopamine as an electron acceptor. We also
identify candidate dehydroxylases that metabolize additional host- and
plant-derived catechols. These dehydroxylases belong to a distinct group of
largely uncharacterized molybdenum-dependent enzymes that likely mediate primary 
and secondary metabolism in multiple environments. Finally, we observe catechol
dehydroxylation in the gut microbiotas of diverse mammals, confirming the
presence of this chemistry in habitats beyond the human gut. These results
suggest that the chemical strategies that mediate metabolism and interactions in 
the human gut are relevant to a broad range of species and habitats.

plain-language-summary: Inside the human gut there are trillions of bacteria.
These microbes are critical for breaking down and modifying molecules that the
body consumes (such as nutrients and drugs) and produces (such as hormones).
Although metabolizing these molecules is known to impact health and disease,
little is known about the specific components, such as the genes and enzymes,
involved in these reactions. A prominent microbial reaction in the gut
metabolizes molecules by removing a hydroxyl group from an aromatic ring and
replacing it with a hydrogen atom. This chemical reaction influences the fate of 
dietary compounds, clinically used drugs and chemicals which transmit signals
between nerves (neurotransmitters). But even though this reaction was discovered 
over 50 years ago, it remained unknown which microbial enzymes are directly
responsible for this metabolism. In 2019, researchers discovered the human gut
bacteria Eggerthella lenta produces an enzyme named Dadh that can remove a
hydroxyl group from the neurotransmitter dopamine. Now, Maini Rekdal et al. –
including many of the researchers involved in the 2019 study – have used a range 
of different experiments to further characterize this enzyme and see if it can
break down molecules other than dopamine. This revealed that Dadh specifically
degrades dopamine, and this process promotes E. lenta growth. Next, Maini Rekdal 
et al. uncovered a group of enzymes that had similar characteristics to Dadh and 
could metabolize molecules other than dopamine, including molecules derived from 
plants and nutrients in food. These Dadh-like enzymes were found not only in the 
guts of humans, but in other organisms and environments, including the soil,
ocean and plants. Plant-derived molecules are associated with human health, and
the discovery of the enzymes that break down these products could provide new
insights into the health effects of plant-based foods. In addition, the finding
that gut bacteria harbor a dopamine metabolizing enzyme has implications for the 
interaction between the gut microbiome and the nervous system, which has been
linked to human health and disease. These newly discovered enzymes are also
involved in metabolic reactions outside the human body. Future work investigating
the mechanisms and outputs of these reactions could improve current strategies
for degrading pollutants and producing medically useful molecules.
© 2020, Maini Rekdal et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.50845 
PMCID: PMC7028382
PMID: 32067637 

Conflict of interest statement: VM, PN, ML, SK, CL, JB, EB No competing interests
declared, PT Reviewing editor, eLife, EB has consulted for Merck, Novartis, and
Kintai Therapeutics; is on the Scientific Advisory Boards of Kintai Therapeutics 
and Caribou Biosciences.

