
1. Kardiologiia. 2020 Jun 3;60(5):859. doi: 10.18087/cardio.2020.5.n859.

[Gut microbiota and systemic inflammation in patients with chronic heart
failure].

[Article in Russian]

Vlasov AA(1), Salikova SP(2), Grinevich VB(2), Bystrova OV(3), Osipov GA(4),
Meshkova ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)33rd Central Research Test Institute of the Ministry of Defense of Russia,
Volsk-18. S. M. Kirov Military Medical Academy of the Ministry of Defense of
Russia, St. Petersburg.
(2)S. M. Kirov Military Medical Academy of the Ministry of Defense of Russia, St.
Petersburg.
(3)Institute of Analytical Toxicology, Ltd., Krasnogorsk District, Moscow Region,
Russia.
(4)3 Institute of Analytical Toxicology, Ltd., Krasnogorsk District, Moscow
Region, Russia.

Aim To study the interrelationship between intensity of chronic systemic
inflammation (CSI) with severity of the condition and intestinal microbiocenosis 
parameters in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF).Material and methods 47
hospitalized patients with symptomatic CHF were evaluated. The following
parameters were determined: clinical condition; N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
peptide (NT-proBNP). C-reactive protein (CRP); serum interleukins (IL) 6 and 10; 
and intestinal microbiocenosis composition by mass-spectrometry of microbial
markers in whole blood. Microbiocenosis indexes were compared in the main group
and in 38 outpatient patients with arterial hypertension and ischemic heart
disease without CHF.Results Direct, medium-power correlations were found between 
CRP and IL-6 concentrations and severity of clinical condition (NT-proBNP, ХСН
stage, and edema severity) in patients with CHF. Most patients with CHF had lower
numbers of bifido-, lacto-, propionic-, and eubacteria, and Clostridium (С.)
ramosum and higher numbers of aspergillus. Among CHF patients, the highest
indexes of endotoxemia, gram (-) bacteria, cocci, actinomycetes, and microfungi
were observed in the group with NT-proBNP from 400 to 2000 pg/ml. Direct
correlations were observed for amounts of C. hystolyticum, Pseudonocardia spp.,
and Aspergillus spp. with IL-6 and IL-10 and unidirectional inverse correlation
were observed for these cytokines with Propionibacterium acnes and jensenii,
Streptomyces spp., and Nocardia asteroides. In addition, IL-6 concentration was
negatively correlated with contents of Staphylococcus aureus, C. difficile, C.
ramosum, Eggerthella lenta, and Corynebacterium spp. and was positively
correlated with C. propionicum, Moraxella spp. and Flavobacterium spp.
Concentration of IL-6 directly correlated with the number of Eubacterium spp. and
inversely correlated with numbers of Ruminicoccus spp. and Streptomyces
farmamarensis. The amount of Streptomyces farmamarensis negatively correlated
with CRP concentrations.Conclusion The study results evidence the significance of
intestinal microbial-tissue complex in the pathogenesis of CSI in CHF and allow
suggesting this complex as a promising target for therapy.

DOI: 10.18087/cardio.2020.5.n859 
PMID: 32515707  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

