
1. Int Forum Allergy Rhinol. 2020 Jul 12. doi: 10.1002/alr.22627. [Epub ahead of
print]

Comparison of bacterial maxillary sinus cultures between odontogenic sinusitis
and chronic rhinosinusitis.

Yassin-Kassab A(1), Bhargava P(2), Tibbetts RJ(3), Griggs ZH(4), Peterson EI(3), 
Craig JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Henry Ford
Health System, Detroit, MI.
(3)Department of Public Health Services, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial odontogenic sinusitis (ODS) is distinct from other forms of
rhinosinusitis. Diagnosing ODS can be challenging because of nonspecific clinical
presentations and underrepresentation in the literature. The purpose of this
study was to compare maxillary sinus bacterial cultures between patients with ODS
and chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS), to determine whether certain bacteria are
associated with ODS.
METHODS: This was a retrospective case-control study of 276 consecutive patients 
from August 2015 to August 2019 who underwent endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) for 
bacterial ODS, CRS without nasal polyps (CRSsNP), or CRS with nasal polyps
(CRSwNP). When present, pus was sterilely cultured from maxillary sinuses after
maxillary antrostomy, and aerobic and anaerobic cultures were immediately sent
for processing. Demographics and culture results were compared between ODS and
CRS patients, and then separately between ODS and CRSsNP, and ODS and CRSwNP. ODS
culture results were also compared between different dental pathologies
(endodontic vs oroantral fistula).
RESULTS: The following bacteria were significantly more likely in ODS compared to
CRS: mixed anaerobes, Fusobacterium spp., Eikenella corrodens, Streptococcus
intermedius, Streptococcus anginosus, and Streptococcus constellatus.
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa were inversely related to ODS.
There were no significant differences in cultures between the different dental
pathologies.
CONCLUSION: Certain bacteria were more likely to be associated with ODS compared 
to CRS when purulence was cultured from the maxillary sinus. Physicians should
evaluate for an odontogenic source of sinusitis when these ODS-associated
bacteria are identified in maxillary sinus cultures.

© 2020 ARS-AAOA, LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/alr.22627 
PMID: 32656998 

