
1. Einstein (Sao Paulo). 2020 Mar 23;18:eRC5273. doi:
10.31744/einstein_journal/2020RC5273. eCollection 2020.

Acute spontaneous suppurative thyroiditis caused by Eikenella corrodens presented
with thyrotoxicosis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Akhanlı P(1), Bayır Ö(1), Bayram SM(1), Hepşen S(1), Badirshaev M(1), Çakal E(1),
Saylam G(1), Korkmaz MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Health Sciences, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Training and Research 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

Acute suppurative thyroiditis is a very rare and life-threatening endocrine
emergency. Thyrotoxicosis is a rare condition accompanying acute suppurative
thyroiditis. While the majority of the cases in the literature are caused by
different reasons, spontaneous development is very rare. We present a patient
with acute suppurative thyroiditis who presented to our clinic with thyrotoxic
findings, and we compared the case to the literature. A 31-year-old male patient 
was admitted to our clinic with a complaint of progressive neck pain, swelling
and redness on midline neck, fever, and palpitations. On physical examination,
swelling, redness and tenderness were detected on the neck region that was
consistent with the thyroid location. He presented with tremor on the hands,
tachycardia and agitation. Thyroid function tests were compatible with
thyrotoxicosis, but there were findings supporting the presence of infection in
biochemistry tests. On his radiological evaluations, a heterogeneous lesion
divided with small septs was observed, with consolidation areas in the left
thyroid lobe. In fine needle aspiration biopsy, 2mL of purulent fluid could be
aspirated due to the presence of small, separated consolidation areas. He
initiated on antibiotic therapy, propranolol, steroid and symptomatic treatment. 
Eikenella corrodens was detected on the culture antibiogram. Antibiotic therapy
was continued for 14 days due to less symptoms and better biochemical values.
After treatment, the patient had normal thyroid function, had relief of fever and
redness of the neck, and was followed-up. It should be kept in mind that acute
suppurative thyroiditis may develop spontaneously with the findings of
thyrotoxicosis, with no risk factors.

DOI: 10.31744/einstein_journal/2020RC5273 
PMCID: PMC7087456
PMID: 32215470  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

