
1. Proc Inst Mech Eng H. 2020 Aug;234(8):769-783. doi: 10.1177/0954411920924517.
Epub 2020 May 18.

Er,Cr:YSGG laser surface treatment of gamma titanium aluminide: Scanning electron
microscopy-energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer analysis, wettability and
Eikenella corrodens and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans bacteria count-in
vitro study.

Koopaie M(1), Kia Darbandsari A(1), Hakimiha N(2), Kolahdooz S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Laser Research Center of Dentistry, Dentistry Research Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.

Dental implants play an important role in oral health. Titanium dental implants
must endure the complex microflora environment of the oral cavity. Moreover,
bacterial infections have been considered as one of the most important factors of
implant failure. The issue of dental improvement through modification of chemical
composition and surface treatment has received considerable critical attention.
γ-TiAl as a novo biocompatible material revealed a slower corrosion rate in
biological media rather Ti-6Al-4V. The objective of this study is to investigate 
the effect of Er,Cr:YSGG laser on γ-TiAl in comparison with sandblasted and
acid-etched samples as the control groups and machined samples.Wettability,
surface roughness, surface topography, scanning electron microscopy-energy
dispersive X-ray spectrometer analysis of surface and subsurface of samples were 
investigated and bacteria counts of two periodontal bacterial strains
(Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Eikenella corrodens) were evaluated on
the Er,Cr:YSGG laser surface-treated sandblasted and acid-etched and machined
samples.The results of this investigation show that Er,Cr:YSGG laser surface
treatment affects surface roughness, surface topography, wettability, chemical
composition of the surface and bacteria count. Scanning electron
microscopy-energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer analysis of the sample revealed
the increment of titanium and oxygen content and reduction of aluminum content in
the surface and subsurface layer. A. actinomycetemcomitans and E. corrodens count
were found from the lowest level to highest in the sandblasted and acid-etched
samples, laser samples and machined samples, respectively.Using controlled
parameters of Er,Cr:YSGG laser ensured no significant adverse alteration. The
findings to emerge from this study revealed the significant correlation between
microbial count and wettability. Furthermore, the contact angle strongly
correlated with surface roughness.

DOI: 10.1177/0954411920924517 
PMID: 32419598 

