
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Aug;70(8):4432-4450. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003935.
Epub 2020 Jan 2.

Division of the genus Chryseobacterium: Observation of discontinuities in amino
acid identity values, a possible consequence of major extinction events, guides
transfer of nine species to the genus Epilithonimonas, eleven species to the
genus Kaistella, and three species to the genus Halpernia gen. nov., with
description of Kaistella daneshvariae sp. nov. and Epilithonimonas vandammei sp. 
nov. derived from clinical specimens.

Nicholson AC(1), Gulvik CA(1), Whitney AM(1), Humrighouse BW(1), Bell ME(1),
Holmes B(2), Steigerwalt AG(1), Villarma A(1), Sheth M(3), Batra D(3), Rowe
LA(3), Burroughs M(3), Pryor JC(1), Bernardet JF(4), Hugo C(5), Kämpfer P(6),
Newman JD(7)(5), McQuiston JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Special Bacteriology Reference Laboratory, Bacterial Special Pathogens Branch,
Division of High-Consequence Pathogens and Pathology, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
(2)National Collection of Type Cultures, Health Protection Agency, Colindale,
London NW9 5EQ, UK.
(3)Division of Scientific Resources, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Atlanta, Georgia 30333, USA.
(4)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Unité de Virologie et
Immunologie Moléculaires, Domaine de Vilvert, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(5)Department of Microbial, Biochemical and Food Biotechnology, University of the
Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(6)Institut für Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universität Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(7)Biology Department, Lycoming College, Williamsport PA 17701, USA.

The genus Chryseobacterium in the family Weeksellaceae is known to be
polyphyletic. Amino acid identity (AAI) values were calculated from whole-genome 
sequences of species of the genus Chryseobacterium, and their distribution was
found to be multi-modal. These naturally-occurring non-continuities were
leveraged to standardise genus assignment of these species. We speculate that
this multi-modal distribution is a consequence of loss of biodiversity during
major extinction events, leading to the concept that a bacterial genus
corresponds to a set of species that diversified since the Permian extinction.
Transfer of nine species (Chryseobacterium arachidiradicis, Chryseobacterium
bovis, Chryseobacterium caeni, Chryseobacterium hispanicum, Chryseobacterium
hominis, Chryseobacterium hungaricum﻿,, Chryseobacterium pallidum and
Chryseobacterium zeae) to the genus Epilithonimonas and eleven (Chryseobacterium 
anthropi, Chryseobacterium antarcticum, Chryseobacterium carnis, Chryseobacterium
chaponense, Chryseobacterium haifense, Chryseobacterium jeonii, Chryseobacterium 
montanum, Chryseobacterium palustre, Chryseobacterium solincola, Chryseobacterium
treverense and Chryseobacterium yonginense) to the genus Kaistella is proposed.
Two novel species are described: Kaistella daneshvariae sp. nov. and
Epilithonimonas vandammei sp. nov. Evidence is presented to support the
assignment of Planobacterium taklimakanense to a genus apart from
Chryseobacterium, to which Planobacterium salipaludis comb nov. also belongs. The
novel genus Halpernia is proposed, to contain the type species Halpernia
frigidisoli comb. nov., along with Halpernia humi comb. nov., and Halpernia
marina comb. nov.

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.003935 
PMID: 32735208  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

