
1. IUBMB Life. 2020 Aug 22. doi: 10.1002/iub.2358. [Epub ahead of print]

Mass production of active recombinant Chryseobacterium proteolyticum protein
glutaminase in Escherichia coli using a sequential dual expression system and
one-step purification.

Lu X(1)(2), Poon TCW(1), Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pilot Laboratory, Institute of Translational Medicine, Centre for Precision
Medicine Research and Training, Faculty of Health sciences, University of Macau, 
Macau, China.
(2)Department of Biology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cell
Microenvironment and Disease Research and Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Cell
Microenvironment, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China.

Protein glutaminase (PG) is an enzyme that specifically catalyzes the deamidation
of glutamine residues on proteins or peptides, remarkably improving the
solubility, emulsification and foaming properties of food proteins and, thereby, 
conferring great potential in food industry applications. PG is primarily
produced from wild strains of Chryseobacterium proteolyticum and the low enzyme
production yield restricts large-scale industrial applications. In this context, 
by evaluating different cleavage site insertions between the pro-region and
mature domain of PG as well as different linkers flanking the cleavage site, an
E. coli expression and purification protocol has been developed to produce active
recombinant PG. To simplify the production workflow, we developed a sequential
dual expression system. More than 15 mg of pure and active PG was obtained from 1
L of shaking-flask bacteria culture by one-step nickel affinity chromatography
purification. The enzymatic characteristics of the recombinant PG protein were
similar to those of native PG. For the deamidation effect of recombinant PG, the 
deamidation degree (DD) of gliadin reached up to 67% and the solubility increased
84-fold. Thus, this study provides a practical approach to mass producing active 
PG proteins and investigates its potential applications on food proteins.

© 2020 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

DOI: 10.1002/iub.2358 
PMID: 32827356 

