
1. mBio. 2020 Sep 29;11(5). pii: e02351-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02351-20.

A Key Motif in the Cholesterol-Dependent Cytolysins Reveals a Large Family of
Related Proteins.

Evans JC(#)(1), Johnstone BA(#)(2), Lawrence SL(#)(2), Morton CJ(#)(2), Christie 
MP(2), Parker MW(#)(3)(4), Tweten RK(#)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia 
mparker@svi.edu.au Rod-Tweten@ouhsc.edu.
(4)St. Vincent's Institute of Medical Research, Fitzroy, Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA mparker@svi.edu.au
Rod-Tweten@ouhsc.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDCs) are bacterial, β-barrel, pore-forming
toxins. A central enigma of the pore-forming mechanism is how completion of the
prepore is sensed to initiate its conversion to the pore. We identified a motif
that is conserved between the CDCs and a diverse family of nearly 300
uncharacterized proteins present in over 220 species that span at least 10
bacterial and 2 eukaryotic phyla. Except for this motif, these proteins exhibit
little similarity to the CDCs at the primary structure level. Studies herein show
this motif is a critical component of the sensor that initiates the
prepore-to-pore transition in the CDCs. We further show by crystallography,
single particle analysis, and biochemical studies of one of these CDC-like (CDCL)
proteins from Elizabethkingia anophelis, a commensal of the malarial mosquito
midgut, that a high degree of structural similarity exists between the CDC and
CDCL monomer structures and both form large oligomeric pore complexes.
Furthermore, the conserved motif in the E. anophelis CDCL crystal structure
occupies a nearly identical position and makes similar contacts to those observed
in the structure of the archetype CDC, perfringolysin O (PFO). This suggests a
common function in the CDCs and CDCLs and may explain why only this motif is
conserved in the CDCLs. Hence, these studies identify a critical component of the
sensor involved in initiating the prepore-to-pore transition in the CDCs, which
is conserved in a large and diverse group of distant relatives of the
CDCs.IMPORTANCE The cholesterol-dependent cytolysins' pore-forming mechanism
relies on the ability to sense the completion of the oligomeric prepore structure
and initiate the insertion of the β-barrel pore from the assembled prepore
structure. These studies show that a conserved motif is an important component of
the sensor that triggers the prepore-to-pore transition and that it is conserved 
in a large family of previously unidentified CDC-like proteins, the genes for
which are present in a vast array of microbial species that span most terrestrial
environments, as well as most animal and human microbiomes. These studies
establish the foundation for future investigations that will probe the
contribution of this large family of CDC-like proteins to microbial survival and 
human disease.

Copyright © 2020 Evans et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02351-20 
PMID: 32994330 

