
1. PeerJ. 2020 Feb 27;8:e8647. doi: 10.7717/peerj.8647. eCollection 2020.

Antimicrobial resistance and genetic relationships of enterococci from siblings
and non-siblings Heliconius erato phyllis caterpillars.

Huff R(1), Inhoque Pereira R(2), Pissetti C(3), Mellender de Araújo A(4), Alves
d'Azevedo P(2), Frazzon J(5), GuedesFrazzon AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Health Sciences, Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Parasitology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande
do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Basic Health Sciences, Department of Microbiology, Health Sciences Federal
University, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(3)Department of Veterinary Preventive Medicine, Federal University of Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(4)Institute of Biosciences, Genetic Department, Federal University of Rio Grande
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(5)Food Science Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.

Background: Studies evaluating bacteria in insects can provide information about 
host-microorganism-environment interactions. The gut microbial community has a
profound effect on different physiological functions of insects. Enterococcus
spp. are part of the gut community in humans and other animals, as well as in
insects. The presence and antimicrobial resistance profile of enterococci are
well studied in different animals; however, data for Heliconius erato phyllis
(Lepidoptera: Nymphalidae) do not yet exist. Therefore, the aims of this study
were to evaluate the distribution of enterococcal species, their antimicrobial
resistance profile and virulence genes, and the genetic relationships between
enterococci isolated from fecal samples from sibling and non-sibling H. erato
phyllis caterpillars collected from different sites in South Brazil.
Methods: Three H. erato phyllis females were captured (two from a forest fragment
and one from an urban area), and kept individually in open-air insectaries. Eggs 
were collected and caterpillars (siblings and non-siblings) were fed daily with
Passiflora suberosa leaves. Fecal samples (n = 12) were collected from
fifth-instar caterpillars, inoculated in selective medium, and 15 bacterial
colonies were randomly selected from each sample. Enterococci were identified by 
PCR and MALDI-TOF, analyzed by disk diffusion antimicrobial susceptibility tests,
and screened for resistance and virulence genes by PCR. The genetic relationships
between the strains were determined using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
(PFGE).
Results: A total of 178 enterococci strains were identified: E. casseliflavus
(74.15%; n = 132), E. mundtii (21.34%; n = 38), E. faecalis (1.12%; n = 2) and
Enterococcus sp. (3.37%; n = 6). High rates of resistance to rifampicin (56%) and
erythromycin (31%) were observed; 120 (67.41%) of the isolates showed resistance 
to at least one antibiotic and six (3.37%) were multidrug-resistant.None of the
erythromycin-resistant strains was positive for the erm(B) and msrC genes. The
virulence genes esp, ace, and gelE were observed in 35%, 7%, and 1% of the
strains, respectively. PFGE separated the enterococci into 22 patterns, four
being composed of strains from sibling caterpillars.
Conclusion: Enterococcus casseliflavus was the dominant species in fecal samples 
of fifth-instar caterpillars. Resistant enterococci strains may be related to
environmental pollution or the resistome. The PFGE analysis showed genetic
relationships between some strains, suggesting that the enterococci isolated from
fecal samples of the sibling caterpillars might have come from common sources,
e.g., via diet (herbivory) and/or vertical transmission (through the egg
surface). Further studies will be conducted to better understand the role of
Enterococcus in the microbial community of the gastrointestinal tract of these
insects, and the mechanisms involved in acquisition and maintenance of
enterococci.

©2020 Huff et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.8647 
PMCID: PMC7049460
PMID: 32149028 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

