
1. Am J Med Sci. 2020 Jul 1. pii: S0002-9629(20)30288-3. doi:
10.1016/j.amjms.2020.06.028. [Epub ahead of print]

Acquired Genetic Elements that Contribute to Antimicrobial Resistance in Frequent
Gram-Negative Causative Agents of Healthcare-Associated Infections.

Cruz-López F(1), Villarreal-Treviño L(1), Camacho-Ortiz A(2), Morfín-Otero R(3), 
Flores-Treviño S(2), Garza-González E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología e Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, 
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, San Nicolás de los Garza, México.
(2)Hospital Universitario 'Dr. José Eleuterio González', Universidad Autónoma de 
Nuevo León, Monterrey, México.
(3)Hospital Civil de Guadalajara 'Fray Antonio Alcalde', e Instituto de Patología
Infecciosa y Experimental, Centro Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud,
Universidad de Guadalajara, Guadalajara, México.
(4)Hospital Universitario 'Dr. José Eleuterio González', Universidad Autónoma de 
Nuevo León, Monterrey, México. Electronic address: elvira_garza_gzz@yahoo.com.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a worldwide public health problem that reduces 
therapeutic options and increases the risk of death. The causative agents of
healthcare-associated infections (HAIs) are drug-resistant microorganisms of the 
nosocomial environment, which have developed different mechanisms of AMR. The
hospital-associated microbiota has been proposed to be a reservoir of genes
associated with AMR and an environment where the transfer of genetic material
among organisms may occur. The ESKAPE group (Enterococcus faecalis and
Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter
baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter aerogenes and Escherichia
coli is a frequent causative agents of HAIs. In this review, we address the issue
of acquired genetic elements that contribute to AMR in the most frequent
Gram-negative of ESKAPE, with a focus on last resort antimicrobial agents and the
role of transference of genetic elements for the development of AMR.

Copyright © 2020 Southern Society for Clinical Investigation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjms.2020.06.028 
PMID: 32747008 

