
1. Microbiol Res. 2020 Aug 22;241:126585. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126585. [Epub
ahead of print]

Endophytic bacteria of garlic roots promote growth of micropropagated meristems.

Costa Júnior PSP(1), Cardoso FP(2), Martins AD(2), Teixeira Buttrós VH(2),
Pasqual M(2), Dias DR(3), Schwan RF(4), Dória J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Microbiology Sector, Federal University of Lavras, Minas
Gerais, Brazil. Electronic address: paulo.micro@outlook.com.
(2)Agronomy Department, Federal University of Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Food Science Department, Federal University of Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Biology Department, Microbiology Sector, Federal University of Lavras, Minas
Gerais, Brazil.
(5)Agronomy Department, Federal University of Lavras, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
Electronic address: joyce.doria@ufla.br.

Garlic (Allium sativum L.) is one of the crops whose economic importance has
increased considerably in recent years in Brazil. The use of plant
growth-promoting bacteria (PGPB) is a useful alternative for reducing the cost of
agricultural inputs and, consequently, for increasing productivity. Therefore,
the main objective of this work was to isolate and evaluate potential growth
promoters in plants and plant pathogenic fungi growth inhibitors using endophytic
bacteria from garlic roots and bacteria from the Agricultural Microbiology
Culture Collection at the Federal University of Lavras. Besides verifying
improvements in the growth and physiology of garlic meristems grown in vitro
under the action of PGPB. Forty-eight endophytic bacteria were identified using
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry
based on the protein profile of each isolate. Four isolates were chosen according
to their ability to fix nitrogen, to produce auxin and solubilize phosphate. The 
cultivation of garlic meristems in tissue culture with these bacteria was
established at a population level of 106 CFU/mL. The evaluated criteria were: (1)
the colonization capacity of the bacteria inside the garlic plants determined
through scanning electron microscopy; (2) the chlorophyll content; and (3) the
growth of garlic plants in vitro post-PGPB inoculation. Volatiles emitted by
those isolates inhibited fungi growth. The inoculation of garlic meristems with
Enterobacter cloacae and Burkholderia cepacia promoted an improvement in the
growth and physiological attributes of garlic, indicating the feasibility of
their application as plant growth promoters for commercial cultivation.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2020.126585 
PMID: 32919224 

