
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Nov 29;10:2779. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02779. eCollection 
2019.

Multidrug-Resistant and Clinically Relevant Gram-Negative Bacteria Are Present in
German Surface Waters.

Falgenhauer L(1)(2), Schwengers O(1)(2)(3), Schmiedel J(1)(2), Baars C(4),
Lambrecht O(4), Heß S(5)(6), Berendonk TU(5), Falgenhauer J(1)(2), Chakraborty
T(1)(2), Imirzalioglu C(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, 
Germany.
(2)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site
Giessen-Marburg-Langen, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(3)Bioinformatics & Systems Biology, Justus Liebig University Giessen, Giessen,
Germany.
(4)Norddeutscher Rundfunk, Hamburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Hydrobiology, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Department of Microbiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Water is considered to play a role in the dissemination of antibiotic-resistant
Gram-negative bacteria including those encoding Extended-spectrum beta-lactamases
(ESBL) and carbapenemases. To investigate the role of water for their spread in
more detail, we characterized ESBL/Carbapenemase-producing bacteria from surface 
water and sediment samples using phenotypic and genotypic approaches.
ESBL/Carbapenemase-producing isolates were obtained from water/sediment samples. 
Species and antibiotic resistance were determined. A subset of these isolates (n 
= 33) was whole-genome-sequenced and analyzed for the presence of antibiotic
resistance genes and virulence determinants. Their relatedness to isolates
associated with human infections was investigated using multilocus sequence type 
and cgMLST-based analysis. Eighty-nine percent of the isolates comprised of
clinically relevant species. Fifty-eight percent exhibited a multidrug-resistance
phenotype. Two isolates harbored the mobile colistin resistance gene mcr-1. One
carbapenemase-producing isolate identified as Enterobacter kobei harbored bla
VIM- 1. Two Escherichia coli isolates had sequence types (ST) associated with
human infections (ST131 and ST1485) and a Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate was
classified as hypervirulent. A multidrug-resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
isolate encoding known virulence genes associated with severe lung infections in 
cystic fibrosis patients was also detected. The presence of MDR and clinically
relevant isolates in recreational and surface water underlines the role of
aquatic environments as both reservoirs and hot spots for MDR bacteria. Future
assessment of water quality should include the examination of the multidrug
resistance of clinically relevant bacterial species and thus provide an important
link regarding the spread of MDR bacteria in a One Health context.

Copyright © 2019 Falgenhauer, Schwengers, Schmiedel, Baars, Lambrecht, Heβ,
Berendonk, Falgenhauer, Chakraborty and Imirzalioglu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02779 
PMCID: PMC6896662
PMID: 31849911 

