
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Sep 21. pii: AAC.01743-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.01743-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamics of bla KPC-2 dissemination from non-CG258 Klebsiella pneumoniae to other
Enterobacterales via IncN plasmids in an area of high endemicity.

Rada AM(1)(2), De La Cadena E(3), Agudelo C(4), Capataz C(5), Orozco N(6),
Pallares C(3), Dinh AQ(7), Panesso D(7)(8), Ríos R(7)(9), Diaz L(7)(9), Correa
A(10), Hanson BM(7), Villegas MV(3), Arias CA(11)(8)(9), Restrepo E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Bacteria & Cancer Group,
Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia. ana.rada@colmayor.edu.co.
(2)Faculad de Ciencias de la Salud, Biociencias Group, Institución Universitaria 
Colegio Mayor de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(3)Research Group on Antimicrobial Resistance and Hospital Epidemiology,
Universidad El Bosque, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Clinica Universitaria Bolivariana, School of Health Sciences, Universidad
Pontificia Bolivariana, Medellín, Colombia.
(5)Fundación Clínica del Norte, Bello, Colombia.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Bacteria & Cancer Group,
Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.
(7)Division of infectious Diseases and Center for Antimicrobial Resistance and
Microbial Genomics, UTHealth, McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.
(8)Center for Infectious Diseases, UTHealth, School of Public Health, Houston,
Texas, USA.
(9)Molecular Genetics and Antimicrobial Resistance Unit - International Center
for Microbial Genomics, Universidad El Bosque, Bogotá, Colombia.
(10)Universidad Santiago de Cali, Facultad de Ciencias Básicas, Cali, Colombia.
(11)Division of infectious Diseases and Center for Antimicrobial Resistance and
Microbial Genomics, UTHealth, McGovern Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.
Cesar.Arias@uth.tmc.edu.

Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE) pose a significant threat to global
public health. The most important mechanism for carbapenem resistance is the
production of carbapenemases. Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC)
represents one of the main carbapenemases worldwide. Complex mechanisms of bla
KPC dissemination have been reported in Colombia, a country with high endemicity 
of carbapenem resistance. Here, we characterized the dynamics of dissemination of
bla KPC gene among CRE infecting and colonizing patients in three hospitals
localized in a highly endemic area of Colombia (2013 and 2015). We identified the
genomic characteristics of KPC-producing Enterobacterales recovered from patients
infected/colonized and reconstructed the dynamics of dissemination of bla KPC-2
using both short and long read sequencing. We found that spread of bla KPC-2
among Enterobacterales in the participating hospitals was due to intra and
inter-species horizontal gene transfer (HGT) mediated by promiscuous plasmids
associated to transposable elements that was originated from a multi-species
outbreak of KPC-producing Enterobacterales in a neonatal intensive care unit
(ICU). The plasmids were detected in isolates recovered in other units within the
same hospital and nearby hospitals. The gene "epidemic" was driven by
IncN-pST15-type plasmids carrying a novel Tn4401b structure and non-Tn4401
elements (NTEKPC) in Klebsiella spp, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spp and
Citrobacter spp. Of note, mcr-9 was found to co-exist with bla KPC-2 in species
of the Enterobacter cloacae complex. Our findings suggest that the main mechanism
for dissemination of bla KPC-2 is HGT mediated by highly transferable plasmids
among species of Enterobacterales in infected/colonized patients, presenting a
major challenge for public health interventions in developing countries such as
Colombia.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01743-20 
PMID: 32958711 

