
1. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020 Jul;56(1):105993. doi:
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105993. Epub 2020 Apr 23.

Co-existence of the oxazolidinone resistance genes cfr and optrA on two
transferable multi-resistance plasmids in one Enterococcus faecalis isolate from 
swine.

Chen L(1), Han D(1), Tang Z(1), Hao J(1), Xiong W(2), Zeng Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Drugs Development and Safety
Evaluation, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China;
National Laboratory of Safety Evaluation (Environmental Assessment) of Veterinary
Drugs, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; National
Risk Assessment Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Animal Original
Bacteria, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Drugs Development and Safety
Evaluation, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China;
National Laboratory of Safety Evaluation (Environmental Assessment) of Veterinary
Drugs, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; National
Risk Assessment Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Animal Original
Bacteria, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address: xiongwg@scau.edu.cn.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Veterinary Drugs Development and Safety
Evaluation, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China;
National Laboratory of Safety Evaluation (Environmental Assessment) of Veterinary
Drugs, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China; National
Risk Assessment Laboratory for Antimicrobial Resistance of Animal Original
Bacteria, College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. Electronic address: zlzeng@scau.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: To identify and characterize oxazolidinone resistance genes cfr and
optrA in enterococcal isolates.
METHODS: Two hundred and ninety-three enterococcal isolates were screened for the
presence of cfr and optrA by polymerase chain reaction. The transferability of
cfr and optrA was examined by conjugation. S1 nuclease pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis and Southern blotting were used to identify the location of cfr
and optrA. One Enterococcus faecalis isolate carrying both cfr and optrA was
sequenced in full.
RESULTS: cfr and optrA were detected in 16 (5.5%) and 170 (58.0%) enterococcal
isolates, respectively. Sixteen enterococcal isolates (E. faecalis n=13,
Enterococcus avium n=2, Enterococcus mundtii n=1) carried both cfr and optrA. The
cfr-carrying fragment between res and theta in plasmid p4 showed 98.9% identity
to the corresponding region of plasmid pEF120805 from vancomycin-resistant
Enterococcus faecium. The optrA-carrying segment between tnpB and optrA in
plasmid p1 showed >99.9% identity to the corresponding region of genomic DNA from
E. faecalis A101. Plasmid p4 and plasmid p1 were simultaneously conjugated to E. 
faecalis JH2-2.
CONCLUSIONS: One hundred and seventy optrA-positive enterococci were identified
in 293 enterococcal isolates from swine and the farm environment. The
co-existence of cfr and optrA in E. avium and E. mundtii has been identified
previously. cfr and optrA were identified on two new conjugative plasmids from
one E. faecalis isolate. The optrA-carrying segment (IS1216E-optrA-IS1216E) was
reported initially. Among different types of enterococcal plasmids, ISEnfa5 and
IS1216E elements may play a vital role in the dissemination of cfr and optrA,
respectively.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.105993 
PMID: 32335280 

