
1. J Proteomics. 2020 May 30;220:103764. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103764. Epub 2020
Apr 1.

Comparative proteomic analysis reveals metabolic variability of probiotic
Enterococcus durans during aerobic and anaerobic cultivation.

Comerlato CB(1), Zhang X(2), Walker K(2), Brandelli A(3), Figeys D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Microbiologia Aplicada, Instituto de Ciência e
Tecnologia de Alimentos, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 91510-970,
Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(3)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Microbiologia Aplicada, Instituto de Ciência e
Tecnologia de Alimentos, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, 91510-970,
Porto Alegre, Brazil. Electronic address: abrand@ufrgs.br.
(4)Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Canada.
Electronic address: dfigeys@uottawa.ca.

The variation in the bioavailability of oxygen constitutes the environmental
conditions found by bacteria in their passage through the host gastro-intestinal 
tract. Given the importance of oxygen in the defense mechanism of bacteria, it is
important to understand how bacteria respond to this stress at a metabolic level.
The probiotic strain Enterococcus durans LAB18S was cultivated under aerobic and 
anaerobic conditions using prebiotic oligosaccharides as carbon source. The whole
cell proteome and secretome were analyzed through label-free quantitative
proteomics approach. The results showed that the LAB18S isolate when grown with
fructo-oligosacchrides (FOS) showed a higher number of differentially expressed
proteins compared to samples with galacto-oligosaccharides (GOS) or glucose.
Clinically important enzymes for the treatment of cancer, L-asparaginase and
arginine deiminase, were overexpressed when the isolate was cultured in FOS. In
addition, the absence of oxygen induced the strain to produce proteins related to
cell multiplication, cell wall integrity and resistance, and H2O2 detoxification.
This study showed that E. durans LAB18S growing on FOS was stimulated to produce 
clinically important biomolecules, including proteins that have been investigated
as potential antineoplastic agents. Significance: The probiotic strain E. durans 
LAB18S produce clinically relevant enzymes for the treatment of cancer when
cultivated in symbiosis with fructo-oligosacchrides (FOS). In addition, proteins 
associated with cellular multiplication, cell wall integrity and resistance, and 
H2O2 detoxification were induced under anaerobic growth. These characteristics
could be relevant to support maintenance of intestinal health.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103764 
PMID: 32247174 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Authors declare no
conflicts of interest. CRediT author statement. CBC and XZ designed the analysis,
performed the experiments and wrote the manuscript, KW performed experiments and 
data analysis, AB and DF conceived the idea, participated in design and
coordination, and secured funding. All authors reviewed the final manuscript.

