
1. BMC Surg. 2020 May 6;20(1):92. doi: 10.1186/s12893-020-00759-y.

A unusual case of multifocal pyogenic abscess formation following ERCP procedure.

Merei F(1), Shapiro G(2), Abu Shakra I(1), Bickel A(1)(3), Ganam S(1), Bez M(2), 
Kakiashvili E(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery A, Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya, Israel.
(2)Medical Corps, Israel Defense Forces, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(3)Faculty of Medicine in the Galilee, Bar-Ilan University, Safad, Israel.
(4)Department of Surgery A, Galilee Medical Center, Nahariya, Israel.
elik@gmc.gov.il.
(5)Faculty of Medicine in the Galilee, Bar-Ilan University, Safad, Israel.
elik@gmc.gov.il.

BACKGROUND: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is essential
for managing biliary and pancreatic disorders. Infection is the most morbid
complication of ERCP and among the most common causes of ERCP-related death.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 69-year-old man presented with right upper quadrant
abdominal pain, obstructive jaundice and abnormal liver function tests.
Ultrasound revealed cholelithiasis without bile duct dilation. After receiving
intravenous antibiotics for acute cholecystitis, the patient was discharged. Two 
weeks later, an endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated gallstones and CBD dilation of
up to 6.4 mm with 2 filling defects. An ERCP was performed with a papillotomy and
stone extraction. Twenty-four hours post-ERCP the patient developed a fever,
chills, bilirubinemia and elevated liver function tests. Ascending cholangitis
was empirically treated using Ceftriaxone and Metronidazole. However, the patient
remained febrile, with a diffusely tender abdomen and elevated inflammatory
markers. A CT revealed a very small hypodense lesion in the seventh liver
segment. Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase positive Klebsiella Pneumonia and
Enterococcus Hirae were identified, and the antibiotics were switched to Imipenem
and Cilastatin. The hypodense lesion in the liver increased to 1.85 cm and a new 
hypodense lesion was seen in the right psoas. At day 10 post-ERCP, the patient
started having low back pain and difficulty walking. MRI revealed L4-L5 discitis 
with a large epidural abscess, spanning L1-S1 and compressing the spinal cord.
Decompressive laminectomy of L5 was done and Klebsiella pneumonia was identified.
Due to continued drainage from the wound, high fever, we performed a total body
CT which revealed increased liver and iliopsoas abscess. Decompressive
laminectomy was expanded to include L2-L4 and multiple irrigations were done.
Gentamycin and Vancomycin containing polymethylmethacrylate beads were implanted 
locally and drainage catheters were placed before wound closure.
Multidisciplinary panel discussion was performed, and it was decided to continue 
with a non invasive approach .
CONCLUSIONS: Early recognition of complications and individualized therapy by a
multi-disciplined team is important for managing post-ERCP septic complications. 
Particular attention should be given to adequate coverage by empiric antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1186/s12893-020-00759-y 
PMCID: PMC7203808
PMID: 32375832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

