
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Apr 30;11:578. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00578. eCollection
2020.

Exploring the Potential of CRISPR-Cas9 Under Challenging Conditions: Facing
High-Copy Plasmids and Counteracting Beta-Lactam Resistance in Clinical Strains
of Enterobacteriaceae.

Tagliaferri TL(1)(2), Guimarães NR(1), Pereira MPM(1), Vilela LFF(3), Horz HP(2),
Dos Santos SG(1), Mendes TAO(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology, RWTH Aachen University Hospital, Aachen,
Germany.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universidade Federal de
Viçosa, Viçosa, Brazil.

The antimicrobial resistance (AMR) crisis urgently requires countermeasures for
reducing the dissemination of plasmid-borne resistance genes. Of particular
concern are opportunistic pathogens of Enterobacteriaceae. One innovative
approach is the CRISPR-Cas9 system which has recently been used for plasmid
curing in defined strains of Escherichia coli. Here we exploited this system
further under challenging conditions: by targeting the bla TEM- 1 AMR gene
located on a high-copy plasmid (i.e., 100-300 copies/cell) and by directly
tackling bla TEM- 1-positive clinical isolates. Upon CRISPR-Cas9 insertion into a
model strain of E. coli harboring bla TEM- 1 on the plasmid pSB1A2, the plasmid
number and, accordingly, the bla TEM- 1 gene expression decreased but did not
become extinct in a subpopulation of CRISPR-Cas9 treated bacteria. Sequence
alterations in bla TEM- 1 were observed, likely resulting in a dysfunction of the
gene product. As a consequence, a full reversal to an antibiotic sensitive
phenotype was achieved, despite plasmid maintenance. In a clinical isolate of E. 
coli, plasmid clearance and simultaneous re-sensitization to five beta-lactams
was possible. Reusability of antibiotics could be confirmed by rescuing larvae of
Galleria mellonella infected with CRISPR-Cas9-treated E. coli, as opposed to
infection with the unmodified clinical isolate. The drug sensitivity levels could
also be increased in a clinical isolate of Enterobacter hormaechei and to a
lesser extent in Klebsiella variicola, both of which harbored additional
resistance genes affecting beta-lactams. The data show that targeting drug
resistance genes is encouraging even when facing high-copy plasmids. In clinical 
isolates, the simultaneous interference with multiple genes mediating overlapping
drug resistance might be the clue for successful phenotype reversal.

Copyright © 2020 Tagliaferri, Guimarães, Pereira, Vilela, Horz, dos Santos and
Mendes.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00578 
PMCID: PMC7203346
PMID: 32425894 

