
1. J Proteomics. 2020 Sep 29:103994. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103994. [Epub ahead
of print]

Characterization and proteomic analysis of outer membrane vesicles from a
commensal microbe, Enterobacter cloacae.

Bhar S(1), Edelmann MJ(1), Jones MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Cell Science Department, IFAS, University of Florida, FL
32611, USA.
(2)Microbiology and Cell Science Department, IFAS, University of Florida, FL
32611, USA. Electronic address: mmk@ufl.edu.

Outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) are membrane-enclosed spherical entities released 
by gram-negative bacteria and are important for bacterial survival under stress
conditions. There have been numerous studies on OMVs released by gram-negative
pathogenic bacteria, but an understanding of the functions and characteristics of
the OMVs produced by commensal microbes is still lacking. Enterobacter cloacae is
a gram-negative commensal bacterium present in the human gut microbiome, but this
organism can also function as an opportunistic pathogen. Understanding the
OMV-mediated communication route between bacteria-bacteria or bacteria-host is
essential for the determination of the biological functions of the commensal
bacterium in the gut and delineating between benign and virulent characteristics.
In this study, we have described a proteome of E. cloacae OMVs, which are
membrane vesicles in a size range of 20-300 nm. Proteomic analysis showed the
presence of membrane-bound proteins, including transporters, receptors, signaling
molecules, and protein channels. The physical and proteomic analyses also
indicate this bacterium uses two mechanisms for OMV production. This study is one
of the few existing descriptions of the proteomic profile of OMVs generated by a 
commensal Proteobacteria, and the first report of OMVs produced by E. cloacae.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study prioritizes the importance of understanding the
vesicular proteome of the human commensal bacterium, Enterobacter cloacae. We
demonstrate for the first time that the gram-negative bacterium E. cloacae ATCC
13047 produces outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). The proteomic analysis showed
enrichment of membrane-bound proteins in these vesicles. Understanding the cargo 
proteins of OMVs will help in exploring the physiological and functional role of 
these vesicles in the human microbiome and how they assist in the conversion of a
bacterium from commensal to pathogen under certain conditions. While EM images
reveal vesicles budding from the bacterial surface, the presence of cytoplasmic
proteins and genomic DNA within the OMVs indicate that explosive cell lysis is an
additional mechanism of biogenesis for these OMVs along with outer membrane
blebbing. This research encourages future work on characterizing membrane
vesicles produced by commensal bacterial and investigating their role in cell to 
cell communication.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103994 
PMID: 33007464 

