
1. Carbohydr Polym. 2020 Oct 1;245:116592. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116592. Epub 
2020 Jun 11.

Supramolecular polyelectrolyte complexes based on cyclodextrin-grafted chitosan
and carrageenan for controlled drug release.

Evangelista TFS(1), Andrade GRS(2), Nascimento KNS(1), Dos Santos SB(3), de
Fátima Costa Santos M(4), Da Ros Montes D'Oca C(5), Dos S Estevam C(3), Gimenez
IF(6), Almeida LE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Materials Science and Engineering, Federal University 
of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, SE, Brazil.
(2)Postgraduate Program in Energy, Federal University of Espírito Santo, São
Mateus, ES, Brazil. Electronic address: george.andrade@ufes.br.
(3)Department of Physiology, Federal University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, SE,
Brazil.
(4)Posgraduate Program of Chemistry, NMR Laboratory, Departament of Chemistry,
Federal University of Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(5)NMR Laboratory, Departament of Chemistry, Federal University of Paraná,
Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, SE,
Brazil.
(7)Postgraduate Program in Materials Science and Engineering, Federal University 
of Sergipe, São Cristóvão, SE, Brazil. Electronic address: edu@ufs.br.

In the present study, supramolecular polyelectrolyte complexes (SPEC) based on a 
cyclodextrin-grafted chitosan derivative and carrageenan were prepared and
evaluated for controlled drug release. Samples were characterized by FTIR, SEM,
and ζ-potential measurements, which confirmed the formation of the polymeric
complex. The phenolphthalein test confirmed the presence and availability of
inclusion sites from the attached βCD. Silver sulfadiazine was used as the model 
drug and the association with the SPEC was studied by FTIR and computational
molecular modeling, using a semi-empirical method. DRS and TEM analyses have
shown that Ag+ ions from the drug were reduced to form metallic silver
nanostructures. In vitro tests have shown a clear bacterial activity toward
Gram-positive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus durans/hirae and
Gram-negative bacteria Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli. Finally, this 
work shows that βCD-chitosan/carrageenan supramolecular polyelectrolyte complexes
hold an expressive potential to be applied as a polymer-based system for
controlled drug release.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2020.116592 
PMID: 32718656 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no competing financial interest.

