
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Jul 2;324:108631. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108631. Epub 2020 Apr 13.

Microbial dynamics in durum wheat kernels during aging.

Gaglio R(1), Cirlincione F(1), Di Miceli G(1), Franciosi E(2), Di Gerlando R(1), 
Francesca N(1), Settanni L(3), Moschetti G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e Forestali, Università di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze 4, 90128 Palermo, Italy.
(2)Research and Innovation Centre, Fondazione Edmund Mach (FEM), Via E. Mach 1,
San Michele all'Adige, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e Forestali, Università di Palermo,
Viale delle Scienze 4, 90128 Palermo, Italy. Electronic address:
luca.settanni@unipa.it.

In the present work the microbial dynamics in wheat kernels were evaluated over
time. The main aim of this research was to study the resistance of lactic acid
bacteria (LAB) and yeasts associated to unprocessed cereals used for bread making
during long term conservation. To this purpose four Triticum durum Desf.
genotypes including two modern varieties (Claudio and Simeto) and two Sicilian
wheat landraces (Russello and Timilia) were analysed by a combined
culture-independent and -dependent microbiological approach after one, two or
three years from cultivation and threshing. DNA based MiSeq Illumina technology
was applied to reveal the entire bacterial composition of all semolina samples.
The samples showed a different distribution of bacterial taxa per variety and
time of storage. The groups mostly represented were Stenotrophomonas,
Pseudomonas, Erwinia, Delftia and Sphingomonas genera, Enterobacteriaceae and
Oxalobacteriaceae families, and Actinobacteria phylum. Among LAB, only
Enterococcus genus was detected barely in a single sample (Simeto stored for one 
year) by the next generation sequencing, indicating that LAB remained unassigned 
or their abundances were below 0.1% or their DNAs were rendered inaccessible.
Plate counts showed consistent differences in relation to genotypes and duration 
of storage, with the highest levels found for total mesophilic microorganisms
detected up 6.8 Log CFU/g. Colonies of presumptive sourdough LAB were detected
only in a few samples. Cocci constituted the major group of LAB in almost all
samples. Following the enrichment procedure, almost all samples were
characterised by the presence of acidifying microorganisms. All isolates
collected before and after enrichment represented 28 different strains belonging 
to 10 species of Enterococcus, Lactobacillus and Pediococcus genera. The most
resistant species during aging were Enterococcus faecium, Enterococcus durans,
Lactobacillus brevis, Lactobacillus pentosus and Lactobacillus paracasei
demonstrating that lactobacilli and enterococci are able to overcome the
stressing conditions represented by cereal storage better than other LAB genera
commonly found associated to cereals after harvest. Yeast community included
mostly species with no interest in bread making.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108631 
PMID: 32388172  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

