
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 Jul 26. pii: dkaa305. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa305.
[Epub ahead of print]

Microevolution of acquired colistin resistance in Enterobacteriaceae from ICU
patients receiving selective decontamination of the digestive tract.

Janssen AB(1), van Hout D(2), Bonten MJM(1)(2), Willems RJL(1), van Schaik
W(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht
University, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Microbiology and Infection, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Colistin is an antibiotic that targets the LPS molecules present in
the membranes of Gram-negative bacteria. It is used as a last-resort drug to
treat infections with MDR strains. Colistin is also used in selective
decontamination of the digestive tract (SDD), a prophylactic therapy used in
patients hospitalized in ICUs to selectively eradicate opportunistic pathogens in
the oropharyngeal and gut microbiota.
OBJECTIVES: To unravel the mechanisms of acquired colistin resistance in
Gram-negative opportunistic pathogens obtained from SDD-treated patients.
RESULTS: Routine surveillance of 428 SDD-treated patients resulted in 13 strains 
with acquired colistin resistance (Escherichia coli, n = 9; Klebsiella aerogenes,
n = 3; Enterobacter asburiae, n = 1) from 5 patients. Genome sequence analysis
showed that these isolates represented multiple distinct colistin-resistant
clones but that colistin-resistant strains within the same patient were clonally 
related. We identified previously described mechanisms that lead to colistin
resistance, i.e. a G53 substitution in the response regulator PmrA/BasR and the
acquisition of the mobile colistin resistance gene mcr-1.1, but we also observed 
novel variants of basR with an 18 bp deletion and a G19E substitution in the
sensor histidine kinase BasS. We experimentally confirmed that these variants
contribute to reduced colistin susceptibility. In a single patient, we observed
that colistin resistance in a single E. coli clone evolved through two unique
variants in basRS.
CONCLUSIONS: We show that prophylactic use of colistin during SDD can select for 
colistin resistance in species that are not intrinsically colistin resistant.
This highlights the importance of continued surveillance for strains with
acquired colistin resistance in patients treated with SDD.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa305 
PMID: 32712659 

