
1. Foods. 2020 May 26;9(6). pii: E686. doi: 10.3390/foods9060686.

Comparison of Antimicrobial Resistance and Pan-Genome of Clinical and
Non-Clinical Enterococcus cecorum from Poultry Using Whole-Genome Sequencing.

Sharma P(1), Gupta SK(1), Barrett JB(1), Hiott LM(1), Woodley TA(1), Kariyawasam 
S(2), Frye JG(1), Jackson CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bacterial Epidemiology and Antimicrobial Resistance Research Unit, United
States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, U.S. National
Poultry Research Center, Athens, GA 30605, USA.
(2)Department of Comparative, Diagnostic, and Population Medicine, College of
Veterinary Medicine, The University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Enterococcus cecorum is an emerging avian pathogen, particularly in chickens, but
can be found in both diseased (clinical) and healthy (non-clinical) poultry. To
better define differences between E. cecorum from the two groups, whole-genome
sequencing (WGS) was used to identify and compare antimicrobial resistance genes 
as well as the pan-genome among the isolates. Eighteen strains selected from our 
previous study were subjected to WGS using Illumina MiSeq and comparatively
analyzed. Assembled contigs were analyzed for resistance genes using ARG-ANNOT.
Resistance to erythromycin was mediated by ermB, ermG, and mefA, in clinical
isolates and ermB and mefA, in non-clinical isolates. Lincomycin resistance genes
were identified as linB, lnuB, lnuC, and lnuD with lnuD found only in
non-clinical E. cecorum; however, lnuB and linB were found in only one clinical
isolate. For both groups of isolates, kanamycin resistance was mediated by
aph3-III, while tetracycline resistance was conferred by tetM, tetO, and tetL. No
mutations or known resistance genes were found for isolates resistant to either
linezolid or chloramphenicol, suggesting possible new mechanisms of resistance to
these drugs. A comparison of WGS results confirmed that non-clinical isolates
contained more resistance genes than clinical isolates. The pan-genome of
clinical and non-clinical isolates resulted in 3651 and 4950 gene families,
respectively, whereas the core gene sets were comprised of 1559 and 1534 gene
families in clinical and non-clinical isolates, respectively. Unique genes were
found more frequently in non-clinical isolates than clinical. Phylogenetic
analysis of the isolates and all the available complete and draft genomes showed 
no correlation between healthy and diseased poultry. Additional genomic
comparison is required to elucidate genetic factors in E. cecorum that contribute
to disease in poultry.

DOI: 10.3390/foods9060686 
PMCID: PMC7353540
PMID: 32466367 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

