
1. Plant Biol (Stuttg). 2020 Apr 23. doi: 10.1111/plb.13124. [Epub ahead of print]

Plant growth-promoting endophytic bacteria augment growth and salinity tolerance 
in rice plants.

Khan MA(1), Asaf S(2), Khan AL(2), Adhikari A(1), Jan R(1), Ali S(1), Imran M(1),
Kim KM(1), Lee IJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Biosciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Republic 
of Korea.
(2)Natural and Medical Sciences Research Center, University of Nizwa, Nizwa,
Oman.

Salt stress negatively affects growth and development of plants. However, it is
hypothesized that plant growth-promoting endophytic bacteria can greatly
alleviate the adverse effects of salinity and can promote growth and development 
of plants. In the present research, we aimed to isolate endophytic bacteria from 
halotolerant plants and evaluate their capacity for promoting crop plant growth. 
The bacterial endophytes were isolated from selected plants inhabiting sand dunes
at Pohang beach, screened for plant growth-promoting traits and applied to rice
seedlings under salt stress (NaCl; 150 mm). Out of 59 endophytic bacterial
isolates, only six isolates, i.e. Curtobacterium oceanosedimentum SAK1,
Curtobacterium luteum SAK2, Enterobacter ludwigii SAK5, Bacillus cereus SA1,
Micrococcus yunnanensis SA2, Enterobacter tabaci SA3, resulted in a significant
increase in the growth of Waito-C rice. The cultural filtrates of bacterial
endophytes were tested for phytohormones, including indole-3-acetic acid,
gibberellins and organic acids. Inoculation of the selected strains considerably 
reduced the amount of endogenous ABA in rice plants under NaCl stress, however,
they increased GSH and sugar content. Similarly, these strains augmented the
expression of flavin monooxygenase (OsYUCCA1) and auxin efflux carrier (OsPIN1)
genes under salt stress. In conclusion, the pragmatic application of the above
selected bacterial strains alleviated the adverse effects of NaCl stress and
enhanced rice growth attributes by producing various phytohormones.

© 2020 German Society for Plant Sciences and The Royal Botanical Society of the
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1111/plb.13124 
PMID: 32329163 

