
1. J Dairy Sci. 2020 Sep 30. pii: S0022-0302(20)30763-3. doi:
10.3168/jds.2020-18198. [Epub ahead of print]

Sodium butyrate promotes lipopolysaccharide-induced innate immune responses by
enhancing mitogen-activated protein kinase activation and histone acetylation in 
bovine mammary epithelial cells.

Dai H(1), Wei G(1), Wang Y(1), Ma N(1), Chang G(1), Shen X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Ministry of Education Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health
and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, 210095, P. R. China.
(2)Ministry of Education Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health
and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing, 210095, P. R. China. Electronic address: xzshen@njau.edu.cn.

The innate immune response plays a crucial role in recovery from infectious
diseases by promoting the clearance of pathogens. Sodium butyrate (NaB) is an
energy source for cellular processes with the potential to regulate the innate
immune response. The present study aimed to evaluate the effect of NaB on the
innate immune response in a bovine mammary alveolar cell line (MAC-T) initiated
by lipopolysaccharides (LPS). Thus, treatments were conducted as follows: treated
with 1× PBS for 24 h (control), pretreated with 1 mM NaB (optimized by cell
viability assays and dose-dependent experiment) for 18 h followed by treatment of
1× PBS for 6 h (NaB), pretreated with 1× PBS for 18 h followed by stimulation
with LPS (1 µg/mL) for 6 h (LPS), and pretreated with 1 mM NaB for 18 h followed 
by stimulation with LPS (1 µg/mL) for 6 h (NaB + LPS). Different inhibitors were 
also used to elucidate the underlying mechanism. Furthermore, cells were treated 
with NaB and heat-inactivated Escherichia coli to test the effect of NaB on
transcription of genes related to the innate immune response triggered by the
major causative pathogen of mastitis. Each treatment had 3 replicates and was
repeated 3 times. Proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and β-defensins are
crucial secretion factors in innate immunity, and transcription of these factors 
was increased by NaB during challenge with LPS or heat-inactivated E. coli in
MAC-T cells. Acetylation of histone H3 protein, which promotes gene expression by
affecting the structure of chromatin, was also upregulated by NaB in response to 
LPS stimulation. P38 mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK), JNK, and Erk 1 and
2 are key upstream regulators of the expression of proinflammatory cytokines,
chemokines, and β-defensins, and their activity was enhanced by NaB during LPS
stimulation. Furthermore, inhibitors were used to assess the role of MAPK
signaling in the effects of NaB. The results showed that inhibitors of p38 MAPK, 
Erk, and JNK attenuated the NaB-induced upregulation of TNF and β-defensin 5
(DEFB5) transcription, and that the inhibitor of Erk attenuated the NaB-induced
upregulation of IL1B transcription during LPS challenge. Enhanced transcription
of CXCL8 by NaB was blocked by the inhibitor of Erk and p38 MAPK during LPS
stimulation. Overall, NaB boosted the LPS-induced innate immune response by
promoting the expression of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and
β-defensins, which was associated with enhanced MAPK signaling activation and
histone H3 acetylation.

Copyright © 2020 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2020-18198 
PMID: 33010913 

