
1. Vet Med Sci. 2020 Oct 3. doi: 10.1002/vms3.340. [Epub ahead of print]

Occurrence and characteristics of Escherichia coli mcr-1-like in rabbits in
Shandong, China.

Wang X(1)(2), Zhai Z(3), Zhao X(4), Zhang H(5), Jiang H(6), Wang X(1), Wang H(1),
Chang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shandong Agricultural University,
Tai'an, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy 
of Medical Sciences, Tai'an, China.
(3)Postdoctoral Scientific Research Station, Tai'an City Central Hospital,
Tai'an, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Teaching Affairs, Hebei University of Economics and Business,
Shijiazhuang, China.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shandong First
Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical Sciences, Tai'an, China.

Polymyxin is regarded as the last retort to fight against multidrug-resistant
(MDR) Enterobacteriaceae. The emergency and spread of polymyxin-associated
resistance gene mcr-1 evoked great panic of no medicine to cure the bacterial
infection in society. mcr-1 is widespread in domestic and wild animals.
Therefore, continuous monitoring of its prevalence and characteristics is
required. In this study, we used a polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based method
to detect the mcr-1 of Escherichia coli isolated from rabbits of Tai'an, China,
and determined the characteristics of mcr-1-bearing plasmids. A total of 55
non-duplicated E. coli was recovered from the swabs of rabbit faeces. Plasmid
profiling, plasmid and chromosome PCR, complete genome sequencing, a conjugation 
experiment, lactose fermentation experiment, multilocus sequence typing and
polymyxin resistance tests were performed to determine the characteristics of
mcr-1-bearing plasmids. 14.6% (8/55) of the specimens were mcr-1 positive. The
mcr-1-positive E. coli harboured more drug-resistant genes compared with the
mcr-1-negative specimens, and results showed four sequence types. Overall, these 
findings suggested the possible threat of the transmission of mcr-1 from rabbits 
to humans, especially since the gene is located on transferable plasmids making
horizontal transfer relatively easy. Since food-producing animals are necessary
for our daily diet, worldwide cooperation is needed in fighting the spread of
this drug resistance gene to avoid human infections with MDR pathogenic bacteria.

© 2020 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.340 
PMID: 33012114 

