
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Oct 4. doi: 10.1111/jam.14881. [Epub ahead of print]

Inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and faecal indicator bacteria in
cattle slurry by addition of ammonia.

Petersen HH(1)(2), Dalsgaard A(2), Vinneras B(3), Jensen LS(4), Le TTA(2),
Petersen MA(5), Enemark HL(1), Forslund A(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Institute, Technical University of Denmark, Kemitorvet,
2800 Kgs, Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(3)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Energy and
Technology, SE-750 07, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Department of Plant and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University
of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(5)Department for Palliative Medicine, The Research Unit, Bispebjerg Hospital,
Copenhagen, NV, Denmark.

AIMS: To determine inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum oocysts and reduction
of Escherichia coli and enterococci in cattle slurry added aqueous ammonia.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Escherichia coli, enterococci and non-viable C. parvum
oocysts (DAPI+ PI+) were enumerated every second day for two weeks in cattle
slurry amended with 60 mmol l-1 aq. ammonia and compared with untreated slurry at
three temperatures. Regardless of temperature, the proportion of non-viable C.
parvum oocysts increased significantly faster over time in slurry with added
ammonia than raw slurry (p=0.021) corresponding to 62.0% higher inactivation
(P=0.001) at day 14. Additionally, 91.8% fewer E. coli and 27.3% fewer
enterococci was observed slurry added ammonia at day 14 compared raw slurry.
CONCLUSION: The addition of aqueous ammonia to raw slurry significantly reduced
the viability of C. parvum oocysts and numbers of bacterial indicators. Hence,
ammonia is usable to lower pathogen concentrations in slurry prior before
application to agricultural land.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF STUDY: Livestock waste is a valuable source of plant
nutrients and organic matter, but may contain high concentrations of pathogens
like Escherichia coli and Cryptosporidium spp. that can be spread in the
environment, and cause disease outbreaks. However, die-off rates of pathogens in 
organic waste can increase following increasing ammonia concentrations.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14881 
PMID: 33012074 

