
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Oct 4. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14620. [Epub ahead of print]

L-Aspartate as a high-quality nitrogen source in Escherichia coli: Regulation of 
L-aspartase by the nitrogen regulatory system and interaction of L-aspartase with
GlnB.

Schubert C(1), Zedler S(1), Strecker A(1), Unden G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Wine Research, Institute for Molecular Physiology, Johannes
Gutenberg-University Mainz, 55099, Mainz, Germany.

Escherichia coli uses the C4-dicarboxylate transporter DcuA for
L-aspartate/fumarate antiport, which results in the exploitation of L-aspartate
for fumarate respiration under anaerobic conditions and for nitrogen assimilation
under aerobic and anaerobic conditions. L-Aspartate represents a high-quality
nitrogen source for assimilation. Nitrogen assimilation from L-aspartate required
DcuA, and aspartase AspA to release ammonia. Ammonia is able to provide by
established pathways the complete set of intracellular precursors (ammonia,
L-aspartate, L-glutamate, and L-glutamine) for synthesizing amino acids,
nucleotides, and amino sugars. AspA was regulated by a central regulator of
nitrogen metabolism, GlnB. GlnB interacted with AspA and stimulated its
L-aspartate deaminase activity (NH3 -forming), but not the reverse amination
reaction. GlnB stimulation required 2-oxoglutarate and ATP, or uridylylated
GlnB-UMP, consistent with the activation of nitrogen assimilation under nitrogen 
limitation. Binding to AspA was lost in the GlnB(Y51F) mutant of the
uridylylation site. AspA therefore represents a new type of GlnB target that
binds GlnB (with ATP and 2-oxoglutarate), or GlnB-UMP (with or without
effectors), and both situations stimulate AspA deamination activity. Thus, AspA
represents the central enzyme for nitrogen assimilation from L-aspartate, and
AspA is integrated into the nitrogen assimilation network by the regulator GlnB.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14620 
PMID: 33012071 

