
1. Antimicrob Resist Infect Control. 2020 Oct 2;9(1):161. doi:
10.1186/s13756-020-00823-5.

The prevalence and mechanism of triclosan resistance in Escherichia coli isolated
from urine samples in Wenzhou, China.

Zeng W(1), Xu W(2), Xu Y(2), Liao W(2), Zhao Y(1), Zheng X(1), Xu C(2), Zhou
T(3), Cao J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, School of Laboratory Medicine and
Life Science, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China. wyztli@163.com.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science, School of Laboratory Medicine and
Life Science, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
wzcjming@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The widespread application of triclosan contributes to its residual
deposition in urine, which provides an environment of long-term exposure to
triclosan for the intestinal Escherichia coli. We determined the triclosan and
antibiotic resistance characteristics of E. coli strains isolated from urine
samples and further investigated the resistance mechanism and molecular epidemic 
characteristics of triclosan-resistant E. coli isolates.
METHODS: A total of 200 non-repetitive E. coli strains were isolated from urine
samples and then identified. The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of
triclosan and antibiotics, fabI mutation, efflux pump activity, the expression of
14 efflux pump encoding genes, and epidemiological characteristics were
determined by the agar dilution method, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), carbonyl
cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP) inhibition test, quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR), multilocus sequence typing (MLST), and
pulse-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) for all triclosan-resistant isolates.
Furthermore, we also investigated the effect of triclosan exposure in vitro on
antibiotic susceptibility and the efflux pump encoding gene expressions of
triclosan-susceptible strains via serial passage experiments.
RESULTS: Of the 200 E. coli isolates, 2.5% (n = 5) were found to be resistant to 
triclosan, and multidrug resistance (MDR) and cross-resistance phenotypes were
noted for these triclosan-resistant strains. The triclosan-sensitive strains also
exhibited MDR phenotypes, probably because of the high resistance rate to AMP,
CIP, LVX, and GEN. Gly79Ala and Ala69Thr amino acid changes were observed in the 
triclosan-resistant strains, but these changes may not mediate resistance of E.
coli to triclosan, because mutations of these two amino acids has also been
detected in triclosan-susceptible strains. Moreover, except for DC8603, all other
strains enhanced the efflux pumps activity. As compared with ATCC 25922, except
for fabI, increased expressions were noted for all efflux pump encoding genes
such as ydcV, ydcU, ydcS, ydcT, cysP, yihV, acrB, acrD, and mdfA among the
studied strains with varying PFGE patterns and STs types. Unexpectedly, 5
susceptible E. coli isolates showed rapidly increasing triclosan resistance after
exposure to triclosan in vitro for only 12 days, while MDR or cross-resistance
phenotypes and the overexpression of efflux pump genes were recorded among these 
triclosan-induced resistant isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report that short-term triclosan exposure
in vitro increases triclosan resistance in susceptible E. coli isolates. After
acquiring resistance, these strains may present MDR or cross-resistance
phenotypes. Moreover, triclosan resistance mainly involves the overexpression of 
fabI and efflux pumps in E. coli isolates.

DOI: 10.1186/s13756-020-00823-5 
PMID: 33008474 

