
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Mar;158(4):930-946.e1. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.11.294. 
Epub 2019 Dec 5.

Differences in Gut Microbiota in Patients With vs Without Inflammatory Bowel
Diseases: A Systematic Review.

Pittayanon R(1), Lau JT(2), Leontiadis GI(2), Tse F(2), Yuan Y(2), Surette M(2), 
Moayyedi P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Farncombe Family
Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada; Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand; King Chulalongkorn
Memorial Hospital, The Thai Red Cross, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Farncombe Family
Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Farncombe Family
Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada. Electronic address: moayyep@mcmaster.ca.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Altering the intestinal microbiota has been proposed as a
treatment for inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), but there are no established
associations between specific microbes and IBD. We performed a systematic review 
to identify frequent associations.
METHODS: We searched the MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials databases, through
April 2, 2018 for studies that compared intestinal microbiota (from fecal or
colonic or ileal tissue samples) among patients (adult or pediatric) with IBD vs 
healthy individuals (controls). The primary outcome was difference in specific
taxa in fecal or intestinal tissue samples from patients with IBD vs controls. We
used the Newcastle-Ottawa scale to assess the quality of studies included in the 
review.
RESULTS: We identified 2631 citations; 48 studies from 45 articles were included 
in the analysis. Most studies evaluated adults with Crohn's disease or ulcerative
colitis. All 3 studies of Christensenellaceae and Coriobacteriaceae and 6 of 11
studies of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii reported a decreased amount of those
organisms compared with controls, whereas 2 studies each of Actinomyces,
Veillonella, and Escherichia coli revealed an increased amount in patients with
Crohn's disease. For patients with ulcerative colitis, Eubacterium rectale and
Akkermansia were decreased in all 3 studies, whereas E coli was increased in 4 of
9 studies. The microbiota diversity was either decreased or not different in
patients with IBD vs controls. Fewer than 50% of the studies stated comparable
sexes and ages of cases and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: In a systematic review, we found evidence for differences in
abundances of some bacteria in patients with IBD vs controls, but we cannot make 
conclusions due to inconsistent results and methods among studies. Further
large-scale studies, with better methods of assessing microbe populations, are
needed.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.11.294 
PMID: 31812509  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

