
1. Exp Mol Med. 2020 Sep 16. doi: 10.1038/s12276-020-00501-x. [Epub ahead of print]

Brain tumor diagnostic model and dietary effect based on extracellular vesicle
microbiome data in serum.

Yang J(1)(2), Moon HE(3), Park HW(3), McDowell A(1), Shin TS(1), Jee YK(4), Kym
S(5), Paek SH(6)(7), Kim YK(8).

Author information: 
(1)MD Healthcare R&D Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Health and Safety Convergence Science Introduction, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical Research Institute, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Dankook University College of Medicine,
Cheonan, Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Inje University Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje 
University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical Research Institute, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. paeksh@snu.ac.kr.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Cancer Research Institute, Hypoxia Ischemia
Disease Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
paeksh@snu.ac.kr.
(8)MD Healthcare R&D Institute, Seoul, Republic of Korea. ykkim@mdhc.kr.

The human microbiome has been recently associated with human health and disease. 
Brain tumors (BTs) are a particularly difficult condition to directly link to the
microbiome, as microorganisms cannot generally cross the blood-brain barrier
(BBB). However, some nanosized extracellular vesicles (EVs) released from
microorganisms can cross the BBB and enter the brain. Therefore, we conducted
metagenomic analysis of microbial EVs in both serum (152 BT patients and 198
healthy controls (HC)) and brain tissue (5 BT patients and 5 HC) samples based on
the V3-V4 regions of 16S rDNA. We then developed diagnostic models through
logistic regression and machine learning algorithms using serum EV metagenomic
data to assess the ability of various dietary supplements to reduce BT risk in
vivo. Models incorporating the stepwise method and the linear discriminant
analysis effect size (LEfSe) method yielded 12 and 29 significant genera as
potential biomarkers, respectively. Models using the selected biomarkers yielded 
areas under the curves (AUCs) >0.93, and the model using machine learning
resulted in an AUC of 0.99. In addition, Dialister and [Eubacterium] rectale were
significantly lower in both blood and tissue samples of BT patients than in those
of HCs. In vivo tests showed that BT risk was decreased through the addition of
sorghum, brown rice oil, and garlic but conversely increased by the addition of
bellflower and pear. In conclusion, serum EV metagenomics shows promise as a rich
data source for highly accurate detection of BT risk, and several foods have
potential for mitigating BT risk.

DOI: 10.1038/s12276-020-00501-x 
PMID: 32939014 

