
1. Dig Dis Sci. 2020 Feb 19. doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06061-4. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Dysfunctional Gut Microbiota Through Rectal Swab in Patients
with Different Severity of Acute Pancreatitis.

Yu S(1), Xiong Y(2), Xu J(1), Liang X(3), Fu Y(1), Liu D(1), Yu X(1), Wu D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital,
Peking Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1
Shuaifuyuan, Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1 Shuaifuyuan,
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, The Second People's Hospital of Guiyang,
Guiyang, 550004, China.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, No. 1 Shuaifuyuan,
Dongcheng District, Beijing, 100730, China. wudong@pumch.cn.

BACKGROUND: Acute pancreatitis (AP) has a wide spectrum of severity and can be
associated with considerable morbidity and mortality. Whether gut microbiota
dysbiosis is associated with AP severity remains obscure.
AIMS: We aim to investigate the differences in the alterations of gut microbiota 
in different grades of AP severity.
METHODS: We collected clinical information and rectal swab samples from 80
individuals. The gut microbiota was tested by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, gut
microbiota species composition analysis, difference analysis, random forest model
prediction analysis, and gut microbiota species correlation network analysis.
RESULTS: There was a different microbiota profile in different severity grades.
Bacteroides, Escherichis-Shigella, and Enterococcus were dominant species in
mild, moderately severe, and severe AP, respectively. Finegoldia was the most
significantly increased and Blautia the most decreased species in mild AP.
Anaerococcus was the most significantly increased and Eubacterium hallii the most
decreased species in moderately severe AP. Enterococcus was the most
significantly increased and Eubacterium hallii the most decreased species in
severe AP. Finegoldia, Eubacterium_hallii, and Lachnospiraceae were potential
diagnostic biomarkers for mild AP and Eubacterium_hallii and Anaerococcus for
moderately severe AP. There was a positive interaction between Firmicutes and
Bacteroidetes in mild AP.
CONCLUSIONS: The disturbed gut microbiota is different among grades of AP,
suggesting their potential role in the progression of disease severity. There was
a different microbiota profile in different severity grades. Bacteroides,
Escherichis-Shigella, and Enterococcus were dominant gut microbiota species in
MAP, MSAP, and SAP, respectively. Finegoldia was the most significantly increased
and Blautia the most decreased gut microbiota species in MAP. Anaerococcus was
the most significantly increased and Eubacterium hallii the most decreased
species in MSAP. Enterococcus was the most significantly increased and
Eubacterium hallii the most decreased species in SAP. Finegoldia,
Eubacterium_hallii, and Lachnospiraceae were potential diagnostic biomarkers for 
MAP and Eubacterium_hallii and Anaerococcus for MSAP. There was a positive
interaction between Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes in MAP.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-020-06061-4 
PMID: 32076933 

