
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Aug 21;295(34):11971-11981. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012934. Epub
2020 Jun 22.

MtcB, a member of the MttB superfamily from the human gut acetogen Eubacterium
limosum, is a cobalamin-dependent carnitine demethylase.

Kountz DJ(1), Behrman EJ(2), Zhang L(3), Krzycki JA(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA.
(3)Campus Chemical Instrument Center Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility,
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Krzycki.1@osu.edu.
(5)Ohio State Biochemistry Program, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

The trimethylamine methyltransferase MttB is the first described member of a
superfamily comprising thousands of microbial proteins. Most members of the MttB 
superfamily are encoded by genes that lack the codon for pyrrolysine
characteristic of trimethylamine methyltransferases, raising questions about the 
activities of these proteins. The superfamily member MtcB is found in the human
intestinal isolate Eubacterium limosum ATCC 8486, an acetogen that can grow by
demethylation of l-carnitine. Here, we demonstrate that MtcB catalyzes
l-carnitine demethylation. When growing on l-carnitine, E. limosum excreted the
unusual biological product norcarnitine as well as acetate, butyrate, and
caproate. Cellular extracts of E. limosum grown on l-carnitine, but not lactate, 
methylated cob-(I)alamin or tetrahydrofolate using l-carnitine as methyl donor.
MtcB, along with the corrinoid protein MtqC and the
methylcorrinoid:tetrahydrofolate methyltransferase MtqA, were much more abundant 
in E. limosum cells grown on l-carnitine than on lactate. Recombinant MtcB
methylates either cob(I)alamin or Co(I)-MtqC in the presence of l-carnitine and, 
to a much lesser extent, γ-butyrobetaine. Other quaternary amines were not
substrates. Recombinant MtcB, MtqC, and MtqA methylated tetrahydrofolate via
l-carnitine, forming a key intermediate in the acetogenic Wood-Ljungdahl pathway.
To our knowledge, MtcB methylation of cobalamin or Co(I)-MtqC represents the
first described mechanism of biological l-carnitine demethylation. The conversion
of l-carnitine and its derivative γ-butyrobetaine to trimethylamine by the gut
microbiome has been linked to cardiovascular disease. The activities of MtcB and 
related proteins in E. limosum might demethylate proatherogenic quaternary amines
and contribute to the perceived health benefits of this human gut symbiont.

© 2020 Kountz et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.012934 
PMCID: PMC7443480
PMID: 32571881 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

