
1. Parasit Vectors. 2020 Sep 4;13(1):445. doi: 10.1186/s13071-020-04330-9.

Diversity of Cryptosporidium spp. in wild rodents from the Canary Islands, Spain.

García-Livia K(1)(2), Martín-Alonso A(1), Foronda P(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de
Canarias, Universidad de La Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Canary Islands,
Spain.
(2)Departament Obstetricia y Ginecología, Pediatría, Medicina Preventiva y Salud 
Pública, Toxicología, Medicina Legal y Forense y Parasitología, Universidad de La
Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Canary Islands, Spain.
(3)Instituto Universitario de Enfermedades Tropicales y Salud Pública de
Canarias, Universidad de La Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Canary Islands,
Spain. pforonda@ull.edu.es.
(4)Departament Obstetricia y Ginecología, Pediatría, Medicina Preventiva y Salud 
Pública, Toxicología, Medicina Legal y Forense y Parasitología, Universidad de La
Laguna, San Cristobal de La Laguna, Canary Islands, Spain. pforonda@ull.edu.es.

BACKGROUND: Cryptosporidium spp. are worldwide protozoan parasites which include 
species that can lead to cryptosporidiosis in humans. Different animal species
can serve as reservoirs and sources of dissemination of the disease, such as
rodent species due their potential in transmitting zoonotic pathogens to humans
and other animals. In the Canary Islands (Spain), Cryptosporidium parvum and
Cryptosporidium hominis have been identified in patients with diarrhea. However, 
the occurrence of Cryptosporidium spp. in possible reservoirs in this archipelago
remains unclear. Considering the zoonotic potential of these protozoans, the aim 
of the present study was to determine the presence of Cryptosporidium spp. in
peridomestic wild rodents and the possible role of these mammals as a source of
transmission of these protozoans in Canary Islands.
METHODS: A total of 179 rodents belonging to Rattus rattus and Mus musculus
domesticus from four Canary Islands, La Palma, El Hierro, Tenerife and Lanzarote,
were analyzed. Feces were screened for Cryptosporidium spp. by nested PCR of the 
18S ribosomal RNA fragment and the sequences used for phylogenetic analyses.
RESULTS: Cryptosporidium spp. were found widely distributed with an overall
prevalence of 12.30% in rodents (13.86% for R. rattus and 10.25% for M. m.
domesticus). The overall prevalence by island was 19.60% for Tenerife, 7.14% for 
La Palma, 5.71% for El Hierro and 0% for Lanzarote. Cryptosporidium tyzzeri,
Cryptosporidium meleagridis, Cryptosporidium muris and Cryptosporidium sp. rat
genotype I and II/III were successfully identified, in addition to two
unidentified Cryptosporidium genotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study contributes to the knowledge of the biodiversity and
distribution of Cryptosporidium spp. in wild rodents from the Canary Islands,
highlighting the presence of three zoonotic species, C. tyzzeri, C. meleagridis
and C. muris, being the first detection of these three species in wild rodents in
the Canary Islands and the first report of C. meleagridis in R. rattus. Given the
results obtained in our study, future studies in non-sampled areas are required
to better understand the epidemiology of these protozoans in wild rodents in the 
archipelago.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-020-04330-9 
PMCID: PMC7472698
PMID: 32887646 

