
1. Parasite Immunol. 2020 Sep 11:e12791. doi: 10.1111/pim.12791. [Epub ahead of
print]

Eosinophils are dispensable for the regulation of IgA and Th17 responses in
Giardia muris infection.

Yordanova IA(1), Lamatsch M(2), Kühl AA(3), Hartmann S(1), Rausch S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection Medicine, Institute of Immunology, Freie Universität
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Institute of Pharmacy, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Core Unit for Immunopathology for Experimental Models, iPATH.Berlin, Charité -
University Medicine Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.

AIMS: IgA and Th17 responses are pivotal for the control of Giardia infections.
Eosinophils support IgA class switching, the survival of intestinal IgA+ plasma
cells at steady state and can control Th17 activity in the small intestine. To
see whether eosinophils regulate adaptive immune responses during giardiasis, we 
investigated Giardia muris infections in wild-type BALB/c and
eosinophil-deficient ∆dblGATA-1 mice.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Infected ∆dblGATA-1 mice did not differ markedly in parasite
control from wild-type mice. Confirming previous studies, naive ∆dblGATA-1 mice
displayed diminished IgA+ B cell frequencies in Peyer's patches. However, IgA
class switching and intestinal IgA secretion in response to G muris infection
were comparable in wild-type BALB/c and ∆dblGATA-1 mice. Both strains displayed
similarly low intestinal Th17 responses, accompanied by a mild expansion of type 
3 innate lymphoid cells (ILC3).
CONCLUSIONS: Contrasting previous reports on overt small intestinal Th17 activity
in eosinophil-deficient mice, IL-17A production is kept in check in the absence
of eosinophils during Giardia infection. Suboptimal homeostatic IgA responses in 
the absence of eosinophils are transiently fostered in infected mice and the
maintenance of IgA+ plasma cells appears to be restored during persisting Giardia
infection.

© 2020 The Authors. Parasite Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pim.12791 
PMID: 32918307 

