
1. J Struct Biol. 2020 Sep 3;212(2):107611. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2020.107611. [Epub
ahead of print]

On the structural organization of the bacillary band of Trichuris muris under
cryopreparation protocols and three-dimensional electron microscopy.

Lopes-Torres EJ(1), Girard-Dias W(2), de Souza W(3), Miranda K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Helmintologia Romero Lascasas Porto, Universidade do Estado do 
Rio de Janeiro, Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia,
Brazil. Electronic address: eduardo.torres@uerj.br.
(2)Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Fundação Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Ultraestrutura Celular Hertha Meyer, Instituto de Biofísica
Carlos Chagas Filho and Centro Nacional de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, s/n Centro de
Ciências da Saúde, Bloco G, CEP: 21941-902, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Instituto
Nacional de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Ultraestrutura Celular Hertha Meyer, Instituto de Biofísica
Carlos Chagas Filho and Centro Nacional de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, s/n Centro de
Ciências da Saúde, Bloco G, CEP: 21941-902, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Instituto
Nacional de Biologia Estrutural e Bioimagem, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic address: kmiranda@biof.ufrj.br.

Whipworms of the genus Trichuris are nematode parasites that infect mammals and
can lead to various intestinal diseases of human and veterinary interest. The
most intimate interaction between the parasite and the host intestine occurs
through the anterior region of the nematode body, inserted into the intestinal
mucosa during infection. One of the most prominent structures of the nematode
surface found at the infection site is the bacillary band, a surface domain
formed by a number of cells, mostly stichocytes and bacillary glands, whose
structure and function are still under debate. Here, we used confocal microscopy,
field emission scanning electron microscopy, helium ion microscopy, transmission 
electron microscopy and FIB-SEM tomography to unveil the functional role of the
bacillary gland cell. We analyzed the surface organization as well as the
intracellular milieu of the bacillary glands of Trichuris muris in high pressure 
frozen/freeze-substituted samples. Results showed that the secretory content is
preserved in all gland openings, presenting a projected pattern. FIB-SEM analysis
showed that the lamellar zone within the bacillary gland chamber is formed by a
set of lacunar structures that may exhibit secretory or absorptive functions. In 
addition, incubation of parasites with the fluid phase endocytosis marker
sulforhodamine B showed a time-dependent uptake by the parasite mouth, followed
by perfusion through different tissues with ultimate secretion through the
bacillary gland. Taken together, the results show that the bacillary gland
possess structural characteristics of secretory and absorptive cells and
unequivocally demonstrate that the bacillary gland cell functions as a secretory 
structure.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jsb.2020.107611 
PMID: 32890779 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

