
1. Circulation. 2020 Sep 15. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.041433. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Single-Cell RNA-seq Unveils Unique Transcriptomic Signatures of Organ-Specific
Endothelial Cells.

Paik DT(1), Tian L(1), Williams IM(2), Rhee S(3), Zhang H(1), Liu C(1), Mishra
R(4), Wu SM(1), Red-Horse K(2), Wu JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Department of Medicine, Division of
Cardiology, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, CA.
(2)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Institute for Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(3)Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.
(4)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University, Stanford, CA.

Background: Endothelial cells (ECs) display considerable functional heterogeneity
depending on the vessel and tissue in which they are located. While these
functional differences are presumably imprinted in the transcriptome, the
pathways and networks which sustain EC heterogeneity have not been fully
delineated. Methods: To investigate the transcriptomic basis of EC specificity,
we analyzed single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data from tissue-specific
mouse ECs generated by the Tabula Muris consortium. We employed a number of
bioinformatics tools to uncover markers and sources of EC heterogeneity from
scRNA-seq data. Results: We found a strong correlation between tissue-specific EC
transcriptomic measurements generated by either scRNA-seq or bulk RNA-seq, thus
validating the approach. Using a graph-based clustering algorithm, we found that 
certain tissue-specific ECs cluster strongly by tissue (e.g. liver, brain)
whereas others (i.e. adipose, heart) have considerable transcriptomic overlap
with ECs from other tissues. We identified novel markers of tissue-specific ECs
and signaling pathways that may be involved in maintaining their identity. Sex
was a considerable source of heterogeneity in the endothelial transcriptome and
we discovered Lars2 to be a gene that is highly enriched in ECs from male mice.
In addition, we found that markers of heart and lung ECs in mice were conserved
in human fetal heart and lung ECs. Finally, we identified potential angiocrine
interactions between tissue-specific ECs and other cell types by analyzing ligand
and receptor expression patterns. Conclusions: In summary, we use scRNA-seq data 
generated by the Tabula Muris consortium to uncover transcriptional networks that
maintain tissue-specific EC identity and to identify novel angiocrine and
functional relationships between tissue-specific ECs.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.041433 
PMID: 32929989 

