
1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Sep 21. pii: annrheumdis-2020-217589. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-217589. [Epub ahead of print]

Circulating microbial small RNAs are altered in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis.

Ormseth MJ(1)(2), Wu Q(3), Zhao S(3), Allen RM(3), Solus J(4), Sheng Q(4), Guo
Y(5), Ye F(4), Ramirez-Solano M(4), Bridges SL(6), Curtis JR(7), Vickers K(4),
Stein CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA
michelle.ormseth@vumc.org.
(2)Research & Development, VA Tennessee Valley Healthcare System Nashville
Campus, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Research & Development, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA.
(5)Research & Development, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
USA.
(6)Research & Development, The University of Alabama at Birmingham Department of 
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(7)Research & Development, University of Alabama at Birmingham Department of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To determine if plasma microbial small RNAs (sRNAs) are altered in
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) compared with control subjects,
associated with RA disease-related features, and altered by disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).
METHODS: sRNA sequencing was performed on plasma from 165 patients with RA and 90
matched controls and a separate cohort of 70 patients with RA before and after
starting a DMARD. Genome alignments for RA-associated bacteria, representative
bacterial and fungal human microbiome genomes and environmental bacteria were
performed. Microbial genome counts and individual sRNAs were compared across
groups and correlated with disease features. False discovery rate was set at
0.05.
RESULTS: Genome counts of Lactobacillus salivarius, Anaerobaculum
hydrogeniformans, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Staphylococcus aureus,
Paenisporosarcina spp, Facklamia hominis, Sphingobacterium spiritivorum,
Lentibacillus amyloliquefaciens, Geobacillus spp, and Pseudomonas fluorescens
were significantly decreased in the plasma of RA compared with control subjects. 
Three microbial transfer RNA-derived sRNAs were increased in RA versus controls
and inversely associated with disease activity. Higher total microbial sRNA reads
were associated with lower disease activity in RA. Baseline total microbial sRNAs
were threefold higher among patients who improved with DMARD versus those who did
not but did not change significantly after 6 months of treatment.
CONCLUSION: Plasma microbial sRNA composition is altered in RA versus control
subjects and associated with some measures of RA disease activity. DMARD
treatment does not alter microbial sRNA abundance or composition, but increased
abundance of microbial sRNAs at baseline was associated with disease activity
improvement at 6 months.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2020-217589 
PMID: 32958509 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: MJO reports grants from
Veterans Health Administration/ Office of Research and Development, during the
conduct of the study. QW reports grants from Alpha Omicron Pi, during the conduct
of the study. CMS reports grants from NIH, during the conduct of the study.
TETRAD Investigators: Levesque reports other from Abbvie, outside the submitted
work. Shadick reports Brigham and Women’s Hospital grant funding from
Mallinckrodt, Bristol Myers Squibb, Crescendo Biosciences, Sanofi-Regeneron,
Lilly and AMGEN; consulting for Bristol Myers Squibb.

