
1. JHEP Rep. 2020 Jul 28;2(6):100154. doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2020.100154. eCollection 
2020 Dec.

Systemic iron reduction by venesection alters the gut microbiome in patients with
haemochromatosis.

Parmanand B(1)(2), Watson M(3)(4), Boland KJ(5), Ramamurthy N(3), Wharton
V(3)(4), Morovat A(6), Lund EK(2), Collier J(3)(4), Le Gall G(2), Kellingray
L(1), Fairweather-Tait S(2), Cobbold JF(3)(4), Narbad A(1), Ryan JD(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Quadram Institute, Norwich, UK.
(2)University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(3)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Beaumont Hospital/Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(6)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Oxford University Hospitals Foundation
Trust, Oxford, UK.
(7)Hepatology Unit, Beaumont Hospital/Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Dublin, Ireland.

Background & Aims: Iron reduction by venesection has been the cornerstone of
treatment for haemochromatosis for decades, and its reported health benefits are 
many. Repeated phlebotomy can lead to a compensatory increase in intestinal iron 
absorption, reducing intestinal iron availability. Given that most gut bacteria
are highly dependent on iron for survival, we postulated that, by reducing gut
iron levels, venesection could alter the gut microbiota.
Methods: Clinical parameters, faecal bacterial composition and metabolomes were
assessed before and during treatment in a group of patients with haemochromatosis
undergoing iron reduction therapy.
Results: Systemic iron reduction was associated with an alteration of the gut
microbiome, with changes evident in those who experienced reduced faecal iron
availability with venesection. For example, levels of Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii, a bacterium associated with improved colonic health, were increased 
in response to faecal iron reduction. Similarly, metabolomic changes were seen in
association with reduced faecal iron levels.
Conclusion: These findings highlight a significant shift in the gut microbiome of
patients who experience reduced colonic iron during venesection. Targeted
depletion of faecal iron could represent a novel therapy for metabolic and
inflammatory diseases, meriting further investigation.
Lay summary: Iron depletion by repeated venesection is the mainstay of treatment 
for haemochromatosis, an iron-overload disorder. Venesection has been associated 
with several health benefits, including improvements in liver function tests,
reversal of liver scarring, and reduced risk of liver cancer. During iron
depletion, iron absorption from the gastrointestinal (GI) tract increases to
compensate for iron lost with treatment. Iron availability is limited in the GI
tract and is crucial to the growth and function of many gut bacteria. In this
study we show that reduced iron availability in the colon following venesection
treatment leads to a change in the composition of the gut bacteria, a finding
that, to date, has not been studied in patients with haemochromatosis.

© 2020 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2020.100154 
PMCID: PMC7516344
PMID: 32995714 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interests to
declare in relation to this study. Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE
disclosure forms for further details.

