
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Aug 5;13:2723-2731. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S262019.
eCollection 2020.

Intestinal Microbiota in Elderly Inpatients with Clostridioides difficile
Infection.

Vakili B(1), Fateh A(2), Asadzadeh Aghdaei H(3), Sotoodehnejadnematalahi F(1),
Siadat SD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Basic Science, Science and Research Branch,
Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Mycobacteriology and Pulmonary Research, Microbiology Research
Center (MRC), Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Purpose: The incidence of Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) has been
reported as 10-fold higher among the elderly population than in young adults. The
aim of this study was to compare the targeted bacteria population in the fecal
microbiota in two groups of hospitalized elderly, categorized according to CDI
and non-CDI.
Patient and Methods: In this case-control study, 84 fecal samples of the 28
patients with CDI and 56 non-CDI patients (>65 years) were studied. C. difficile 
isolates were characterized by anaerobic culture and multiplex PCR. Quantitative 
PCR was used to analyze the bacterial elements.
Results: CDI group differed significantly for a prolonged hospital stay, previous
surgery, residence in nursing home and exposure to a range of antibiotics
including quinolone, clindamycin and cephalosporin. CDI group had significantly
fewer members of Bacteroides spp., Clostridium cluster IV, Bifidobacterium spp., 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and Prevotella spp. in their fecal microbiota than 
the control group (P < 0.05). The abundances of Akkermansia muciniphila,
Lactobacillus spp., Escherichia coli and Klebsiella spp. were higher in group CDI
compared with the control group (P < 0.05).
Conclusion: CDI status is associated with the abundance of some bacterial
populations. In this study, an increase in Akkermansia muciniphila, Lactobacillus
spp., and Enterobacteriaceae genus was highlighted in CDI patients. A reduction
in butyrate-producing bacteria was found in CDI patients. The differences in the 
composition of fecal microbiota can help to understand how antimicrobial agents
impact on gut homeostasis and lead to loss of colonization resistance to C.
difficile.

© 2020 Vakili et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S262019 
PMCID: PMC7415437
PMID: 32801806 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare regarding this paper.

