
1. Iran J Microbiol. 2020 Jun;12(3):231-241.

The effect of immunoregulatory bacteria on the transcriptional activity of Foxp3 
and RORyt genes in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue with Salmonella-induced
inflammation in the presence of vancomycin and Bacteroides fragilis.

Bukina Y(1), Thyhonovska M(2), Koval M(3), Marushchak M(4), Krynytska I(4),
Kamyshnyi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Virology and Immunology, Zaporizhzhya State
Medical University, Zaporizhzhya, Ukraine.
(2)Department of Normal Physiology, Zaporizhzhya State Medical University,
Zaporizhzhya, Ukraine.
(3)Department of General Chemistry, I. Horbachevsky Ternopil National Medical
University, Ternopil, Ukraine.
(4)Department of Functional and Laboratory Diagnostics, I. Horbachevsky Ternopil 
National Medical University, Ternopil, Ukraine.

Background and Objectives: Intestinal microbiota is involved in the development
and maintenance of immune homeostasis. This study was conducted to investigate
the levels of key immunoregulatory bacteria in the intestinal wall-associated
microflora and its effect on the transcriptional activity of the Foxp3 and RORyt 
genes in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) of rats with
Salmonella-induced inflammation, both untreated and treated with vancomycin and
Bacteroides fragilis.
Materials and Methods: To determine the levels of immunoregulatory bacteria in
GALT of rats Q-PCR was used to identify them by species-specific 16S rDNA genes. 
Transcriptional activity of Foxp3 and RORyt genes was determined using Q-PCR with
reverse transcription.
Results: In animals treated with both vancomycin and Salmonella, the levels of
segmented filamentous bacteria (SFB) increased while Akkermansia muciniphila and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii decreased. In rats that received pretreatment with
vancomycin and then were infected with S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium, the
levels of SFB increased, and the number of Bacteroides-Prevotela group, A.
muciniphila, Clostridium spp. clusters XIV, IV, and F. prausnitzii significantly 
decreased, decreasing Foxp3 and increasing Rorγt mRNA expression. Administration 
of B. fragilis to animals treated with S. Enteritidis or S. Typhimurium and
pre-treated with vancomycin caused a decrease in SFB and Rorγt mRNA levels and
conversely, increased the numbers of the Bacteroides-Prevotela group, Clostridium
spp. clusters XIV, IV, A. muciniphila, F. prausnitzii and Foxp3 gene expression
in GALT.
Conclusion: Our results suggest that the commensal microorganism B. fragilis may 
provide a protective role against the development of experimental colitis, which 
has to be taken into consideration for further clarification of the effective
therapeutic strategy of inflammatory bowel diseases, irritable bowel syndrome and
necrotising colitis.

Copyright© 2020 Iranian Neuroscience Society.


PMCID: PMC7340605
PMID: 32685120 

