
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jul 20. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15167. [Epub ahead of
print]

Initial butyrate producers during infant gut microbiota development are endospore
formers.

Appert O(1), Garcia AR(1), Frei R(2)(3), Roduit C(2)(4)(5), Constancias F(1),
Neuzil-Bunesova V(6), Ferstl R(2)(7), Zhang J(8), Akdis C(2)(7), Lauener R(2)(5),
Lacroix C(1), Schwab C(1)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food Biotechnology, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Christine Kühne-Center for Allergy Research and Education (CK-CARE), Davos,
Switzerland.
(3)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, Inselspital,
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)University Children's Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Children's Hospital St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Nutrition and Dietetics, Czech University of Life 
Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), University of Zürich,
Davos, Switzerland.
(8)Laboratory of Toxicology, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland.
(9)Division of Biological and Chemical Engineering, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark.

The acquisition of the infant gut microbiota is key to establishing a
host-microbiota symbiosis. Microbially produced metabolites tightly interact with
the immune system, and the fermentation-derived short-chain fatty acid butyrate
is considered an important mediator linked to chronic diseases later in life. The
intestinal butyrate-forming bacterial population is taxonomically and
functionally diverse and includes endospore formers with high transmission
potential. Succession, and contribution of butyrate-producing taxa during infant 
gut microbiota development have been little investigated. We determined the
abundance of major butyrate-forming groups and fermentation metabolites in
faeces, isolated, cultivated and characterized the heat-resistant cell
population, which included endospores, and compared butyrate formation efficiency
of representative taxa in batch cultures. The endospore community contributed
about 0.001% to total cells, and was mainly composed of the pioneer
butyrate-producing Clostridium sensu stricto. We observed an increase in
abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, butyrate-producing Lachnospiraceae and
faecal butyrate levels with age that is likely explained by higher butyrate
production capacity of contributing taxa compared with Clostridium sensu stricto.
Our data suggest that a successional arrangement and an overall increase in
abundance of butyrate forming populations occur during the first year of life,
which is associated with an increase of intestinal butyrate formation capacity.

© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15167 
PMID: 32686173 

