
1. J Anim Sci. 2020 Aug 1;98(8). pii: skaa208. doi: 10.1093/jas/skaa208.

The combination of nutraceuticals and functional feeds as additives modulates gut
microbiota and blood markers associated with immune response and health in
weanling piglets.

Lo Verso L(1)(2), Talbot G(2)(3), Morissette B(2)(4), Guay F(1)(4), Matte JJ(2), 
Farmer C(2), Gong J(5), Wang Q(5), Bissonnette N(2), Beaulieu C(4), Lessard
M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Département des Sciences Animales, Université Laval, Québec, QC, Canada.
(2)Sherbrooke Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 
Sherbrooke, QC, Canada.
(3)Centre de Recherche en Infectiologie Porcine et Avicole (CRIPA), Faculté de
Médecine Vétérinaire, Université de Montréal, Saint-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada.
(4)Département de Biologie, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC , Canada.
(5)Guelph Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,
Guelph, ON, Canada.

This study aimed to evaluate the effects of a combination of feed additives with 
complementary functional properties on the intestinal microbiota, homocysteine,
and vitamins E and B status as well as systemic immune response of weanling
piglets. At weaning, 32 litters were assigned to one of the following dietary
treatments (DT): 1) conventional diet (CTRL); 2) CTRL diet supplemented with
antibiotics (ATB); 3) a cocktail of feed additives containing cranberry extract, 
encapsulated carvacrol, yeast-derived products, and extra vitamins A, D, E, and B
complex (CKTL); or 4) CKTL diet with bovine colostrum in replacement of plasma
proteins (CKTL + COL). Within each litter, the piglets with lowest and highest
birth weights (LBW and HBW, respectively) and two piglets of medium birth weight 
(MBW) were identified. The MBW piglets were euthanized at 42 d of age in order to
characterize the ileal and colonic microbiota. Blood samples were also collected 
at weaning and at 42 d of age from LBW and HBW piglets to measure insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), cysteine, homocysteine, and vitamins E, B6, and B12, and
to characterize the leukocyte populations. At 42 d of age, cytokine production by
stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells was also measured. In a second
experiment, piglets were reared under commercial conditions to evaluate the
effects of the DT on the growth performance. At the indicator species analysis,
the highest indicator value (IV) for Succinivibrio dextrinosolvens was found in
the CKTL group, whereas the highest IV for Lactobacillus reuteri and
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii was evidenced in the CKTL + COL group (P < 0.05).
Compared with the other DT, CTRL piglets had higher concentrations of
homocysteine, whereas the CKTL and CKTL + COL supplementations increased the
concentrations of vitamins E and B12 (P < 0.05). DT had no effect on IGF-1
concentration and on blood leukocytes populations; however, compared with HBW
piglets, LBW animals had lower values of IGF-1, whereas the percentages of γδ T
lymphocytes and T helper were decreased and increased, respectively (P < 0.05).
CKTL + COL also improved the growth performance of piglets reared under
commercial conditions (P < 0.05). This study highlights the impact of birth
weight on piglet systemic immune defenses and the potential of weaning diet
supplemented with feed additives and bovine colostrum to modulate the
homocysteine metabolism and the intestinal microbiota.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skaa208 
PMCID: PMC7419736
PMID: 32783055 

