
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Jul 15;17(14). pii: E5120. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17145120.

Evaluation of Changes in Gut Microbiota in Patients with Crohn's Disease after
Anti-Tnfα Treatment: Prospective Multicenter Observational Study.

Sanchis-Artero L(1), Martínez-Blanch JF(2), Manresa-Vera S(2), Cortés-Castell
E(3), Rodriguez-Morales J(1), Cortés-Rizo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unit. Department of Digestive Diseases, Hospital of
Sagunto, Av. Ramón y Cajal s/n, 46520 Sagunto, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Genomics Laboratory. ADM-Lifesequencing. Parque Científico Universidad de
Valencia. Catedrático Agustín Escardino Benlloch, 9. Edificio 2, 46980 Paterna,
Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Pediatrics and Organic Chemistry Miguel Hernández 
University, Carretera de Valencia-Alicante S/N, 03550 San Juan de Alicante,
Alicante, Spain.

Background: Crohn's disease is believed to result from the interaction between
genetic susceptibility, environmental factors and gut microbiota, leading to an
aberrant immune response. The objectives of this study are to evaluate the
qualitative and quantitative changes in the microbiota of patients with Crohn's
disease after six months of anti-tumor-necrosis factor (anti-TNFα) (infliximab or
adalimumab) treatment and to determine whether these changes lead to the recovery
of normal microbiota when compared to a control group of healthy subjects. In
addition, we will evaluate the potential role of the Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii/Escherichia coli and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii/Clostridium
coccoides ratios as indicators of therapeutic response to anti-TNFα drugs.
Methods/Design: This prospective multicenter observational study will comprise a 
total of 88 subjects: 44 patients with Crohn's disease scheduled to start
anti-TNFα treatment as described in the drug specifications to control the
disease and 44 healthy individuals who share the same lifestyle and eating
habits. The presence of inflammatory activity will be determined by the
Harvey-Bradshaw index, analytical parameters in blood, including C-reactive
protein, and fecal calprotectin levels at commencement of the study, at three
months and at six months, allowing the classification of patients into responders
and non-responders. Microbiota composition and the quantitative relationship
between Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Escherichia coli and between
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Clostridium coccoides group as indicators of
dysbiosis will be studied at inclusion and six months after initiation of
treatment using ultra sequencing with Illumina technology and comparative
bioinformatics analysis for the former relationship, and digital droplet PCR
using stool samples for the latter. Upon inclusion, patients will complete a
survey of dietary intake for the three days prior to stool collection, which will
be repeated six months later in a second collection to minimize dietary bias.
Discussion: In this study, massive sequencing, a reliable new tool, will be
applied to identify early biomarkers of response to anti-TNF treatment in
patients with Crohn's disease to improve clinical management of these patients,
reduce morbidity rates and improve efficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17145120 
PMCID: PMC7399935
PMID: 32679874 

