
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Feb;61:102111. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102111. Epub 2019 Oct 
18.

Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of anaerobic bacteria, isolated from human 
clinical specimens, within different European and surrounding countries. A joint 
ESGAI study.

Veloo ACM(1), Tokman HB(2), Jean-Pierre H(3), Dumont Y(3), Jeverica S(4),
Lienhard R(5), Novak A(6), Rodloff A(7), Rotimi V(8), Wybo I(9), Nagy E(10);
ESGAI study group.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Groningen, the Netherlands.
Electronic address: a.c.m.veloo@umcg.nl.
(2)Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa School of Medicine, Department of
Medical Microbiology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Laboratoire de Bactériologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier,
Montpellier, France; MIVEGEC, IRD, CNRS, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, 
France.
(4)Institute for Microbiology and Immunology, Medical Faculty, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(5)Analyses et Diagnostics Médicaux (ADMed) Microbiologie, La Chaux-de-Fonds,
Switzerland.
(6)University Hospital Center of Split, University of Split, School of Medicine, 
Split, Croatia.
(7)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Epidemiology of Infectious Diseases,
Leipzig University Hospital, Leipzig, Germany.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Kuwait.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control, Universitair Ziekenhuis
Brussel, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium.
(10)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

OBJECTIVES: Studies on the antimicrobial susceptibility profile of anaerobic
bacteria are underrepresented in the literature. Within this study we aim to give
an extensive overview of the differences in antimicrobial susceptibility profiles
between different European and surrounding countries.
METHODS: Minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) data of different antibiotics
were collected from 10 participating laboratories, representing an equal number
of countries. All MIC's were determined using Etest, according to the protocol
used by the participating laboratory. Anaerobic genera represented by at least 10
clinical isolates were included in the study.
RESULTS: Each country tested different antibiotics, sometimes depending on the
kind of infection and/or the anaerobic species isolated. All countries tested
clindamycin and metronidazole. Resistance rates differed remarkably between the
different countries. Especially in Kuwait, resistance was high for all tested
antibiotics. Unexpected metronidazole resistance was observed for Finegoldia
magna isolates, Peptoniphilus isolates and Eggerthella lenta isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the extensive differences in antimicrobial susceptibility
profile of anaerobic bacteria isolated within different countries, we strongly
recommend to perform this kind of study on a regular basis.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102111 
PMID: 31634565  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

