
1. Nature. 2020 Aug;584(7820):274-278. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2564-6. Epub 2020 Aug
5.

Mucosal or systemic microbiota exposures shape the B cell repertoire.

Li H(1), Limenitakis JP(1), Greiff V(2), Yilmaz B(1), Schären O(3), Urbaniak
C(4), Zünd M(1), Lawson MAE(1), Young ID(1), Rupp S(1), Heikenwälder M(5), McCoy 
KD(1), Hapfelmeier S(3), Ganal-Vonarburg SC(6), Macpherson AJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Maurice Müller Laboratories (DBMR), Universitätsklinik für Viszerale Chirurgie
und Medizin Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)McMaster University Medical Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Chronic Inflammation and Cancer, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Maurice Müller Laboratories (DBMR), Universitätsklinik für Viszerale Chirurgie
und Medizin Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
stephanie.ganal@dbmr.unibe.ch.
(7)Maurice Müller Laboratories (DBMR), Universitätsklinik für Viszerale Chirurgie
und Medizin Inselspital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
andrew.macpherson@dbmr.unibe.ch.

Colonization by the microbiota causes a marked stimulation of B cells and
induction of immunoglobulin, but mammals colonized with many taxa have highly
complex and individualized immunoglobulin repertoires1,2. Here we use a
simplified model of defined transient exposures to different microbial taxa in
germ-free mice3 to deconstruct how the microbiota shapes the B cell pool and its 
functional responsiveness. We followed the development of the immunoglobulin
repertoire in B cell populations, as well as single cells by deep sequencing.
Microbial exposures at the intestinal mucosa generated oligoclonal responses that
differed from those of germ-free mice, and from the diverse repertoire that was
generated after intravenous systemic exposure to microbiota. The IgA
repertoire-predominantly to cell-surface antigens-did not expand after dose
escalation, whereas increased systemic exposure broadened the IgG repertoire to
both microbial cytoplasmic and cell-surface antigens. These microbial exposures
induced characteristic immunoglobulin heavy-chain repertoires in B cells, mainly 
at memory and plasma cell stages. Whereas sequential systemic exposure to
different microbial taxa diversified the IgG repertoire and facilitated
alternative specific responses, sequential mucosal exposure produced limited
overlapping repertoires and the attrition of initial IgA binding specificities.
This shows a contrast between a flexible response to systemic exposure with the
need to avoid fatal sepsis, and a restricted response to mucosal exposure that
reflects the generic nature of host-microbial mutualism in the mucosa.

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2564-6 
PMID: 32760003  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

