
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Oct 1;16(10):e1008881. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008881.
eCollection 2020 Oct.

Periodontal pathogens promote cancer aggressivity via TLR/MyD88 triggered
activation of Integrin/FAK signaling that is therapeutically reversible by a
probiotic bacteriocin.

Kamarajan P(1)(2), Ateia I(3), Shin JM(4)(5), Fenno JC(6), Le C(1), Zhan L(1),
Chang A(7), Darveau R(7), Kapila YL(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orofacial Sciences, School of Dentistry, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America.
(3)Department of Oral Medicine and Periodontology, Mansoura University, Mansoura,
Egypt.
(4)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences, and Endodontics, School of
Dentistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America.
(6)Biologic and Materials Sciences, School of Dentistry, University of Michigan, 
Ann arbor, MI, United States of America.
(7)Department of Periodontics, Oral Health Sciences, School of Dentistry,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States of America.

Epidemiological studies reveal significant associations between periodontitis and
oral cancer. However, knowledge about the contribution of periodontal pathogens
to oral cancer and potential regulatory mechanisms involved is limited.
Previously, we showed that nisin, a bacteriocin and commonly used food
preservative, reduced oral cancer tumorigenesis and extended the life expectancy 
in tumor-bearing mice. In addition, nisin has antimicrobial effects on key
periodontal pathogens. Thus, the purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis
that key periodontal pathogens (Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema denticola,
and Fusobacterium nucleatum) promote oral cancer via specific host-bacterial
interactions, and that bacteriocin/nisin therapy may modulate these responses.
All three periodontal pathogens enhanced oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
migration, invasion, tumorsphere formation, and tumorigenesis in vivo, without
significantly affecting cell proliferation or apoptosis. In contrast, oral
commensal bacteria did not affect OSCC cell migration. Pathogen-enhanced OSCC
cell migration was mediated via integrin alpha V and FAK activation, since stably
blocking alpha V or FAK expression abrogated these effects. Nisin inhibited these
pathogen-mediated processes. Further, Treponema denticola induced TLR2 and 4 and 
MyD88 expression. Stable suppression of MyD88 significantly inhibited Treponema
denticola-induced FAK activation and abrogated pathogen-induced migration.
Together, these data demonstrate that periodontal pathogens contribute to a
highly aggressive cancer phenotype via crosstalk between TLR/MyD88 and
integrin/FAK signaling. Nisin can modulate these pathogen-mediated effects, and
thus has therapeutic potential as an antimicrobial and anti-tumorigenic agent.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008881 
PMID: 33002094 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

