
1. PLoS One. 2019 Dec 11;14(12):e0225858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225858.
eCollection 2019.

California condor microbiomes: Bacterial variety and functional properties in
captive-bred individuals.

Jacobs L(1), McMahon BH(1), Berendzen J(2), Longmire J(1), Gleasner C(1),
Hengartner NW(1), Vuyisich M(3), Cohn JR(1), Jenkins M(4), Bartlow AW(1), Fair
JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, United States of
America.
(2)GenerisBio, Santa Fe, New Mexico, United States of America.
(3)Viome, Los Alamos, New Mexico, United States of America.
(4)The Peregrine Fund, Boise, Idaho, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2020 Mar 16;15(3):e0230738.

Around the world, scavenging birds such as vultures and condors have been
experiencing drastic population declines. Scavenging birds have a distinct
digestive process to deal with higher amounts of bacteria in their primary diet
of carcasses in varying levels of decay. These observations motivate us to
present an analysis of captive and healthy California condor (Gymnogyps
californianus) microbiomes to characterize a population raised together under
similar conditions. Shotgun metagenomic DNA sequences were analyzed from fecal
and cloacal samples of captive birds. Classification of shotgun DNA sequence data
with peptide signatures using the Sequedex package provided both phylogenetic and
functional profiles, as well as individually annotated reads for targeted
confirmatory analysis. We observed bacterial species previously associated with
birds and gut microbiomes, including both virulent and opportunistic pathogens
such as Clostridium perfringens, Propionibacterium acnes, Shigella flexneri, and 
Fusobacterium mortiferum, common flora such as Lactobacillus johnsonii,
Lactobacillus ruminus, and Bacteroides vulgatus, and mucosal microbes such as
Delftia acidovorans, Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, and Corynebacterium falsnii.
Classification using shotgun metagenomic reads from phylogenetic marker genes was
consistent with, and more specific than, analysis based on 16S rDNA data.
Classification of samples based on either phylogenetic or functional profiles of 
genomic fragments differentiated three types of samples: fecal, mature cloacal
and immature cloacal, with immature birds having approximately 40% higher
diversity of microbes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0225858 
PMCID: PMC6905524
PMID: 31825977  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper. All work was completed and
funded at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Two authors (MV and JB) have since left
Los Alamos National Laboratory and their new commercial affiliations and this
does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

