
1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Sep 23;12(10). pii: E2728. doi: 10.3390/cancers12102728.

Fusobacterium nucleatum Accelerates the Progression of Colitis-Associated
Colorectal Cancer by Promoting EMT.

Yu MR(1)(2), Kim HJ(2), Park HR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, BK21 PLUS Project, School of Dentistry, Pusan
National University, Yangsan 50612, Korea.
(2)Periodontal Disease Signaling Network Research Center (MRC), School of
Dentistry, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, Korea.

Recently, it has been reported that Fusobacterium nucleatum, a major pathogen
involved in chronic periodontitis, may play an important role in colorectal
cancer (CRC) progression. In addition, inflammatory bowel diseases such as
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease represent major predisposing conditions
for the development of CRC, and this subtype of cancer is called
colitis-associated cancer (CAC). Although the importance of F. nucleatum in CRC
has attracted attention, its exact role and related mechanism in CAC progression 
remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the effects of F. nucleatum in
experimental colitis induced with dextran sodium sulfate (DSS), which is a
well-known colitis-inducing chemical, on the aggressiveness of CAC and its
related mechanism in both in vitro and in vivo models. F. nucleatum
synergistically increased the aggressiveness and epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) characteristics of CRC cells that were treated with DSS compared
to those in non-treated CRC cells. The role of F. nucleatum in CAC progression
was further confirmed in mouse models, as F. nucleatum was found to significantly
increase the malignancy of azoxymethane (AOM)/DSS-induced colon cancer. This
promoting effect of F. nucleatum was based on activation of the EGFR signaling
pathways, including protein kinase B (AKT) and extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK), and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibition
significantly reduced the F. nucleatum-induced EMT alteration. In conclusion, F. 
nucleatum accelerates the progression of CAC by promoting EMT through the EGFR
signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12102728 
PMID: 32977534 

