
1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 Aug;53(4):513-517. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.027. Epub 2020 Apr 4.

Lemierre's syndrome: A forgotten and re-emerging infection.

Lee WS(1), Jean SS(2), Chen FL(1), Hsieh SM(3), Hsueh PR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Wan Fang
Medical Center, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Internal
Medicine, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Emergency, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Emergency Medicine, Department 
of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Wan Fang Medical Center, Taipei Medicine
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic
address: hsmaids@hotmail.com.
(4)Departments of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of
Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

Lemierre's syndrome, also known as post-anginal septicemia or necrobacillosis, is
characterized by bacteremia, internal jugular vein thrombophlebitis, and
metastatic septic emboli secondary to acute pharyngeal infections. Modern
physicians have "forgotten" this disease. The most common causative agent of
Lemierre's syndrome is Fusobacterium necrophorum, followed by Fusobacterium
nucleatum and anaerobic bacteria such as streptococci, staphylococci, and
Klebsiella pneumoniae. The causative focus mostly originated from pharyngitis or 
tonsillitis, accounting for over 85% of the cases of Lemierre's syndrome.
Pneumonia or pleural empyema is the most common metastatic infection in
Lemierre's syndrome. Antimicrobial therapy should be prescribed for 3-6 weeks.
The treatment regimens include metronidazole and β-lactam antibiotics. In recent 
years, the antibiotic stewardship program has resulted in decreased antibiotic
prescription for upper respiratory tract infections. The incidence of Lemierre's 
syndrome has increased over the past decade. F. necrophorum is an underestimated 
cause of acute pharyngitis or tonsillitis. A high index of suspicion is required 
for the differential diagnosis of acute tonsillopharyngitis with persistent neck 
pain and septic syndrome.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.03.027 
PMID: 32303484 

