
1. Ital J Pediatr. 2020 Sep 3;46(1):122. doi: 10.1186/s13052-020-00882-9.

Pediatric otogenic cerebral venous sinus thrombosis: a case report and a
literature review.

Castellazzi ML(1), di Pietro GM(2), Gaffuri M(3), Torretta S(3), Conte G(4),
Folino F(2), Aleo S(5), Bosis S(6), Marchisio P(5)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Paediatric
Emergency Department, Milan, Italy.
(2)University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Department of
Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery and Department of Clinical Sciences and 
Community Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(4)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Neuroradiology
Unit, Milan, Italy.
(5)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Paediatric Highly
Intensive Care Unit, Milan, Italy.
(6)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Paediatric Highly
Intensive Care Unit, Milan, Italy. samantha.bosis@policlinico.mi.it.
(7)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis in children is a rare but
potentially fatal complication of acute mastoiditis, one of the most common
pediatric infectious diseases. Due to its subtle clinical presentation, suspicion
is essential for a prompt diagnosis and appropriate management. Unfortunately, no
standard treatment options are available. To discuss the possible clinical
presentation, microbiology, and management, we here report the case of a child
with otogenic cerebral venous sinus thrombosis and perform a literature review
starting from 2011.
CASE PRESENTATION: The child, a 10-months-old male, presented clinical signs of
right acute otitis media and mastoiditis. Brain computed tomography scan detected
right sigmoid and transverse sinus thrombosis, as well as a subperiosteal
abscess. Fusobacterium necrophorum and Haemophilus Influentiae were detected on
cultural sampling. A multidisciplinary approach along with a combination of
medical and surgical therapy allowed the patient's full recovery.
CONCLUSION: Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis is a rare but severe complication of
acute otitis media and mastoiditis. The management of this pathological condition
is always challenging and an interdisciplinary approach is frequently required.
Current therapeutic options include a combination of medical and surgical
therapy. A patient-centered approach should guide timing and treatment
management.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-020-00882-9 
PMCID: PMC7470606
PMID: 32883359 

