
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Aug 28;11:2003. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.02003. eCollection
2020.

Circulating and Salivary Antibodies to Fusobacterium nucleatum Are Associated
With Cystic Pancreatic Neoplasm Malignancy.

Alkharaan H(1)(2), Lu L(1)(3), Gabarrini G(1), Halimi A(4), Ateeb Z(4), Sobkowiak
MJ(1), Davanian H(1), Fernández Moro C(5)(6), Jansson L(7), Del Chiaro M(8),
Özenci V(9), Sällberg Chen M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(2)College of Dentistry, Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz University, Al-Kharj, Saudi 
Arabia.
(3)Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Pancreatic Surgery Unit, Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, 
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden.
(5)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical Pathology/Cytology, Karolinska University Hospital,
Huddinge, Sweden.
(7)Clinic of Endodontics and Periodontology, Eastman Institute Stockholm,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, CO, United States.
(9)Division of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.

Objectives: Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are cystic precursor
lesions to pancreatic cancer. The presence of oral microbes in pancreatic tissue 
or cyst fluid has been associated with high-grade dysplasia (HGD) and cancer. The
present study aims at investigating if humoral immunity to pancreas-associated
oral microbes reflects IPMN severity.
Design: Paired plasma (n = 109) and saliva (n = 65) samples were obtained from
IPMN pancreatic cystic tumor cases and controls, for anti-bacterial antibody
analysis and DNA quantification by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and 
qPCR, respectively. Tumor severity was graded by histopathology, laboratory, and 
clinical data. Circulating plasma and salivary antibody reactivity to a
pancreas-associated oral microbe panel were measured by ELISA and correlated to
tumor severity.
Results: The patient group with high-risk cystic tumors (HGD and/or associated
invasive cancer) shows ample circulating IgG reactivity to Fusobacterium
nucleatum (F. nucleatum) but not to Granulicatella adiacens (G. adiacens), which 
is independent of the salivary bacteria DNA levels. This group also shows higher 
salivary IgA reactivity to F. nucleatum, Fap2 of F. nucleatum, and Streptococcus 
gordonii (S. gordonii) compared to low-risk IPMN and controls. The salivary
antibody reactivity to F. nucleatum and Fap2 are found to be highly correlated,
and cross-competition assays further confirm that these antibodies appear
cross-reactive.
Conclusion: Our findings indicate that humoral reactivity against
pancreas-associated oral microbes may reflect IPMN severity. These findings are
beneficial for biomarker development.

Copyright © 2020 Alkharaan, Lu, Gabarrini, Halimi, Ateeb, Sobkowiak, Davanian,
Fernández Moro, Jansson, Del Chiaro, Özenci and Sällberg Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.02003 
PMCID: PMC7484485
PMID: 32983143 

