
1. PLoS Biol. 2020 Aug 25;18(8):e3000788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000788.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Glycan cross-feeding supports mutualism between Fusobacterium and the vaginal
microbiota.

Agarwal K(1)(2), Robinson LS(1)(2), Aggarwal S(1)(2), Foster LR(1)(2),
Hernandez-Leyva A(2)(3), Lin H(1)(2), Tortelli BA(2)(4), O'Brien VP(1)(2), Miller
L(1)(2), Kau AL(2)(3), Reno H(5), Gilbert NM(2)(6)(7), Lewis WG(1)(2), Lewis
AL(1)(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Center for Women's Infectious Disease Research, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(3)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.
(5)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(7)Center for Reproductive Health Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Women with bacterial vaginosis (BV), an imbalance of the vaginal microbiome, are 
more likely to be colonized by potential pathogens such as Fusobacterium
nucleatum, a bacterium linked with intrauterine infection and preterm birth.
However, the conditions and mechanisms supporting pathogen colonization during
vaginal dysbiosis remain obscure. We demonstrate that sialidase activity, a
diagnostic feature of BV, promoted F. nucleatum foraging and growth on mammalian 
sialoglycans, a nutrient resource that was otherwise inaccessible because of the 
lack of endogenous F. nucleatum sialidase. In mice with sialidase-producing
vaginal microbiotas, mutant F. nucleatum unable to consume sialic acids was
impaired in vaginal colonization. These experiments in mice also led to the
discovery that F. nucleatum may also "give back" to the community by reinforcing 
sialidase activity, a biochemical feature of human dysbiosis. Using human vaginal
bacterial communities, we show that F. nucleatum supported robust outgrowth of
Gardnerella vaginalis, a major sialidase producer and one of the most abundant
organisms in BV. These results illustrate that mutually beneficial relationships 
between vaginal bacteria support pathogen colonization and may help maintain
features of dysbiosis. These findings challenge the simplistic dogma that the
mere absence of "healthy" lactobacilli is the sole mechanism that creates a
permissive environment for pathogens during vaginal dysbiosis. Given the ubiquity
of F. nucleatum in the human mouth, these studies also suggest a possible
mechanism underlying links between vaginal dysbiosis and oral sex.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000788 
PMCID: PMC7447053
PMID: 32841232  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no relevant
conflicts of interest.

