
1. mSystems. 2020 Jul 28;5(4). pii: e00502-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00502-20.

Host Genetic Factors Associated with Vaginal Microbiome Composition in Kenyan
Women.

Mehta SD(1), Nannini DR(2)(3), Otieno F(4), Green SJ(5), Agingu W(4), Landay
A(6), Zheng Y(2)(3), Hou L(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, University of Illinois at Chicago
School of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois, USA Supriyad@uic.edu.
(2)Center for Global Oncology, Institute of Global Health, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(4)Nyanza Reproductive Health Society, Kisumu, Kenya.
(5)Genome Research Core, University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, 
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University College of Medicine, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

Bacterial vaginosis (BV) affects 20% of women worldwide and is associated with
adverse reproductive health outcomes and increased risk for HIV. Typically, BV
represents a shift in the vaginal microbiome from one that is dominated by
Lactobacillus to one that is diverse. Persistent racial differences in BV and
diverse vaginal microbiome composition overlap with racial disparities in risks
for HIV and sexually transmitted infection, especially among women of African
descent. Risk factors for BV and nonoptimal vaginal microbiome include sexual
practices, yet racial differences persist when adjusted for behavioral factors,
suggesting a host genetic component. Here, we perform a genome-wide association
study on vaginal microbiome traits in Kenyan women. Linear regression and
logistic regression were performed, adjusting for age and principal components of
genetic ancestry, to evaluate the association between Lactobacillus crispatus,
Lactobacillus iners, Gardnerella vaginalis, Shannon diversity index, and
community state type (CST) with host genetic single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs). We identified novel genomic loci associated with the vaginal microbiome
traits, though no SNP reached genome-wide significance. During pathway enrichment
analysis, Toll-like receptors (TLRs), cytokine production, and other components
of innate immune response were associated with L. crispatus, L. iners, and CST.
Multiple previously reported genomic loci were replicated, including IL-8
(Shannon, CST), TIRAP (L. iners, Shannon), TLR2 (Shannon, CST), MBL2 (L. iners,
G. vaginalis, CST), and MYD88 (L. iners, Shannon). These genetic associations
suggest a role for the innate immune system and cell signaling in vaginal
microbiome composition and susceptibility to nonoptimal vaginal
microbiome.IMPORTANCE Globally, bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a common condition in
women. BV is associated with poorer reproductive health outcomes and HIV risk.
Typically, BV represents a shift in the vaginal microbiome from one that is
dominated by Lactobacillus to one that is diverse. Despite many women having
similar exposures, the prevalence of BV and nonoptimal vaginal microbiome is
increased for women of African descent, suggesting a possible role for host
genetics. We conducted a genome-wide association study of important vaginal
microbiome traits in Kenyan women. We identified novel genetic loci and
biological pathways related to mucosal immunity, cell signaling, and infection
that were associated with vaginal microbiome traits; we replicated previously
reported loci associated with mucosal immune response. These results provide
insight into potential host genetic influences on vaginal microbiome composition 
and can guide larger longitudinal studies, with genetic and functional comparison
across microbiome sites within individuals and across populations.

Copyright © 2020 Mehta et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00502-20 
PMCID: PMC7394359
PMID: 32723796 

