
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Mar 31;11:524. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00524. eCollection
2020.

The Versatility of Opportunistic Infections Caused by Gemella Isolates Is
Supported by the Carriage of Virulence Factors From Multiple Origins.

García López E(1)(2), Martín-Galiano AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biotecnología Microbiana y de Plantas, Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.
(2)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Intrahospital Infections Laboratory, National Centre for Microbiology,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Majadahonda, Spain.

The molecular basis of the pathogenesis of the opportunistic invasive infections 
caused by isolates of the Gemella genus remains largely unknown. Moreover,
inconsistencies in the current species assignation were detected after
genome-level comparison of 16 public Gemella isolates. A literature search
detected that, between the two most pathogenic species, Gemella morbillorum
causes about twice the number of cases compared to Gemella haemolysans. These two
species shared their mean diseases - sepsis and endocarditis - but differed in
causing other syndromes. A number of well-known virulence factors were harbored
by all species, such as a manganese transport/adhesin sharing 83% identity from
oral endocarditis-causing streptococci. Likewise, all Gemellae carried the genes 
required for incorporating phosphorylcholine into their cell walls and encoded
some choline-binding proteins. In contrast, other proteins were species-specific,
which may justify the known epidemiological differences. G. haemolysans, but not 
G. morbillorum, harbor a gene cluster potentially encoding a polysaccharidic
capsule. Species-specific surface determinants also included Rib and MucBP
repeats, hemoglobin-binding NEAT domains, peptidases of C5a complement factor and
domains that recognize extracellular matrix molecules exposed in damaged heart
valves, such as collagen and fibronectin. Surface virulence determinants were
associated with several taxonomically dispersed opportunistic genera of the oral 
microbiota, such as Granulicatella, Parvimonas, and Streptococcus, suggesting the
existence of a horizontally transferrable gene reservoir in the oral environment,
likely facilitated by close proximity in biofilms and ultimately linked to
endocarditis. The identification of the Gemella virulence pool should be
implemented in whole genome-based protocols to rationally predict the pathogenic 
potential in ongoing clinical infections caused by these poorly known bacterial
pathogens.

Copyright © 2020 García López and Martín-Galiano.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00524 
PMCID: PMC7136413
PMID: 32296407 

