
1. Am J Infect Control. 2020 Oct;48(10):1200-1203. doi: 10.1016/j.ajic.2020.01.019. 
Epub 2020 Mar 12.

Aerosol disinfection of bacterial spores by peracetic acid on antibacterial
surfaces and other technical materials.

Horn H(1), Niemeyer B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Process Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Helmut-Schmidt-University, University of the Bundeswehr Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany. Electronic address: helena.horn@hsu-hh.de.
(2)Process Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Helmut-Schmidt-University, University of the Bundeswehr Hamburg, Hamburg,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: The effectiveness of aerosol disinfection processes based on
peracetic acid (PAA) might differ depending on the surface targeted. Especially
antibacterial, oligodynamic materials have to be regarded as they could cause
elevated decomposition of PAA.
AIM: This study aimed on the determination of differences in disinfection
effectiveness using PAA caused by the treated material.
METHODS: Aerosol disinfection of Geobacillus stearothermophilus spores was
performed on the antibacterial, oligodynamic materials copper and brass in
comparison to stainless steel and aluminium as well as polyvinylchloride, wood,
and ceramics. Additionally, the influence of the materials on the decomposition
reaction of PAA was evaluated.
RESULTS: For aluminium and stainless steel as well as ceramics and
polyvinylchloride, a disinfection of 106 spores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus
on 40 cm² was obtained by the employment of 60 mL aerosolized disinfectant/m³ on 
laboratory scale (0.5 m³). For the application on the oligodynamic materials
copper and brass an over 30% higher amount of disinfectant was necessary to
achieve significant disinfection results, than for the other material surfaces.
In contrast to aluminium and stainless steel, copper and brass caused elevated
decomposition of PAA what seems to be the reason for the lowered disinfection
effectiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Applying aerosol disinfection processes, in addition to parameters
such as room size and geometry, the treated materials have to be considered when 
determining the necessary amount of disinfectant.

Copyright © 2020 Association for Professionals in Infection Control and
Epidemiology, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2020.01.019 
PMID: 32173125 

