
1. Microb Cell Fact. 2020 Jul 28;19(1):151. doi: 10.1186/s12934-020-01409-x.

Establishment of a functional system for recombinant production of secreted
proteins at 50 °C in the thermophilic Bacillus methanolicus.

Irla M(1), Drejer EB(1), Brautaset T(1), Hakvåg S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Norwegian University of Science
and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway. sigrid.hakvag@ntnu.no.

BACKGROUND: The suitability of bacteria as microbial cell factories is dependent 
on several factors such as price of feedstock, product range, production yield
and ease of downstream processing. The facultative methylotroph Bacillus
methanolicus is gaining interest as a thermophilic cell factory for production of
value-added products from methanol. The aim of this study was to expand the
capabilities of B. methanolicus as a microbial cell factory by establishing a
system for secretion of recombinant proteins.
RESULTS: Native and heterologous signal peptides were tested for secretion of
α-amylases and proteases, and we have established the use of the thermostable
superfolder green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) as a valuable reporter protein in
B. methanolicus. We demonstrated functional production and secretion of
recombinant proteases, α-amylases and sfGFP in B. methanolicus MGA3 at 50 °C and 
showed that the choice of signal peptide for optimal secretion efficiency varies 
between proteins. In addition, we showed that heterologous production and
secretion of α-amylase from Geobacillus stearothermophilus enables
B. methanolicus to grow in minimal medium with starch as the sole carbon source. 
An in silico signal peptide library consisting of 169 predicted peptides from
B. methanolicus was generated and will be useful for future studies, but was not 
experimentally investigated any further here.
CONCLUSION: A functional system for recombinant production of secreted proteins
at 50 °C has been established in the thermophilic B. methanolicus. In addition,
an in silico signal peptide library has been generated, that together with the
tools and knowledge presented in this work will be useful for further development
of B. methanolicus as a host for recombinant protein production and secretion at 
50 °C.

DOI: 10.1186/s12934-020-01409-x 
PMCID: PMC7389648
PMID: 32723337 

