
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Jul 31;295(31):10766-10780. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014029. Epub
2020 Jun 3.

Cross-utilization of β-galactosides and cellobiose in Geobacillus
stearothermophilus.

Shulami S(1), Zehavi A(1), Belakhov V(2), Salama R(1), Lansky S(3), Baasov T(2), 
Shoham G(4), Shoham Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(2)Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel.
(3)Institute of Chemistry and the Laboratory for Structural Chemistry and
Biology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Institute of Chemistry and the Laboratory for Structural Chemistry and
Biology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel yshoham@technion.ac.il
gil2@mail.huji.ac.il.
(5)Department of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel yshoham@technion.ac.il gil2@mail.huji.ac.il.

Strains of the Gram-positive, thermophilic bacterium Geobacillus
stearothermophilus possess elaborate systems for the utilization of
hemicellulolytic polysaccharides, including xylan, arabinan, and galactan. These 
systems have been studied extensively in strains T-1 and T-6, representing
microbial models for the utilization of soil polysaccharides, and many of their
components have been characterized both biochemically and structurally. Here, we 
characterized routes by which G. stearothermophilus utilizes mono- and
disaccharides such as galactose, cellobiose, lactose, and galactosyl-glycerol.
The G. stearothermophilus genome encodes a phosphoenolpyruvate carbohydrate
phosphotransferase system (PTS) for cellobiose. We found that the cellobiose-PTS 
system is induced by cellobiose and characterized the corresponding GH1
6-phospho-β-glucosidase, Cel1A. The bacterium also possesses two transport
systems for galactose, a galactose-PTS system and an ABC galactose transporter.
The ABC galactose transport system is regulated by a three-component sensing
system. We observed that both systems, the sensor and the transporter, utilize
galactose-binding proteins that also bind glucose with the same affinity. We
hypothesize that this allows the cell to control the flux of galactose into the
cell in the presence of glucose. Unexpectedly, we discovered that G.
stearothermophilus T-1 can also utilize lactose and galactosyl-glycerol via the
cellobiose-PTS system together with a bifunctional 6-phospho-β-gal/glucosidase,
Gan1D. Growth curves of strain T-1 growing in the presence of cellobiose, with
either lactose or galactosyl-glycerol, revealed initially logarithmic growth on
cellobiose and then linear growth supported by the additional sugars. We conclude
that Gan1D allows the cell to utilize residual galactose-containing
disaccharides, taking advantage of the promiscuity of the cellobiose-PTS system.

© 2020 Shulami et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014029 
PMCID: PMC7397113 [Available on 2021-07-31]
PMID: 32493770 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest—The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.

