
1. Food Funct. 2020 Aug 1;11(8):7012-7022. doi: 10.1039/d0fo01649g. Epub 2020 Jul
27.

Metabolism of different dietary phenolic compounds by the urolithin-producing
human-gut bacteria Gordonibacter urolithinfaciens and Ellagibacter
isourolithinifaciens.

García-Villalba R (1), Beltrán D , Frutos MD , Selma MV , Espín JC ,
Tomás-Barberán FA .

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Food & Health, Research Group on Quality, Safety, and
Bioactivity of Plant Foods, Department of Food Science and Technology,
CEBAS-CSIC, P.O. Box 164, 30100 Campus de Espinardo, Murcia, Spain.
fatomas@cebas.csic.es.

Gordonibacter urolithinfaciens and Ellagibacter isourolithinifaciens are two
human gut bacterial species that convert ellagic acid into urolithins. Urolithins
are bioactive postbiotics produced by dehydroxylation reactions catalyzed by
different catechol-dehydroxylases. The metabolic ability of these anaerobic
bacteria on other dietary-phenolic compounds is unknown. In the present study, we
evaluated the metabolism of flavonoids (quercetin, hesperetin, hesperidin,
nobiletin, catechin, isoxanthohumol), isoflavonoids (daidzein), coumarins
(esculetin, umbelliferone, scoparone), phenylpropanoids [caffeic acid;
3-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid (dihydrocaffeic acid); rosmarinic acid,
and chlorogenic acid], benzoic acid derivatives (gallic acid, ellagic acid),
lignans (secoisolariciresinol diglucoside), stilbenes (resveratrol), and
secoiridoids (oleuropein) by G. urolithinfaciens DSM 27213T and E.
isourolithinifaciens DSM 104140T. Both strains metabolized ellagic acid leading
to the characteristic urolithins. They also metabolized caffeic, dihydrocaffeic, 
rosmarinic, and chlorogenic acids. The rest of the phenolic compounds were not
transformed. Catechol dehydroxylation and double bond reduction were prominent
transformations observed during the incubations. The enzymatic activities seem to
have a narrow substrate scope as many catechol- (quercetin, catechin, esculetin, 
gallic acid) and double bond-containing (resveratrol, esculetin, scoparone,
umbelliferone) phenolics were not metabolized. The catechol-dehydroxylase
activity was more efficient in E. isourolithinifaciens, while the reductase
activity was more relevant in G. urolithinfaciens.

DOI: 10.1039/d0fo01649g 
PMID: 32716447 

