
1. Gut. 2019 Dec;68(12):2186-2194. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-317458. Epub 2019 Mar
14.

Enrichment of oral microbiota in early cystic precursors to invasive pancreatic
cancer.

Gaiser RA(1), Halimi A(2), Alkharaan H(1), Lu L(1)(3), Davanian H(1), Healy K(1),
Hugerth LW(4), Ateeb Z(2), Valente R(2), Fernández Moro C(5)(6), Del Chiaro
M(2)(7), Sällberg Chen M(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(2)Pancreatic Surgery Unit, Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical Science, 
Intervention and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Universitetsjukhuset i
Huddinge, Huddinge, Sweden.
(3)Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Center for Translational Microbiome Research, CTMR, Department of
Microbiology, Tumour and Cell Biology (MTC), Karolinska Institutet, Science for
Life Laboratory, Huddinge, Sweden.
(5)Division of Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine (LABMED), Karolinska 
Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical Pathology/Cytology, Karolinska University Hospital,
Huddinge, Sweden.
(7)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of Colorado
at Denver-Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMNs) are pancreatic cysts
that can progress to invasive pancreatic cancer. Associations between oncogenesis
and oral microbiome alterations have been reported. This study aims to
investigate a potential intracystic pancreatic microbiome in a pancreatic cystic 
neoplasm (PCN) surgery patient cohort.
DESIGN: Paired cyst fluid and plasma were collected at pancreatic surgery from
patients with suspected PCN (n=105). Quantitative and qualitative assessment of
bacterial DNA by qPCR, PacBio sequencing (n=35), and interleukin (IL)-1β
quantification was performed. The data were correlated to diagnosis, lesion
severity and clinical and laboratory profile, including proton-pump inhibitor
(PPI) usage and history of invasive endoscopy procedures.
RESULTS: Intracystic bacterial 16S DNA copy number and IL-1β protein quantity
were significantly higher in IPMN with high-grade dysplasia and IPMN with cancer 
compared with non-IPMN PCNs. Despite high interpersonal variation of intracystic 
microbiota composition, bacterial network and linear discriminant analysis effect
size analyses demonstrated co-occurrence and enrichment of oral bacterial taxa
including Fusobacterium nucleatum and Granulicatella adiacens in cyst fluid from 
IPMN with high-grade dysplasia. The elevated intracystic bacterial DNA is
associated with, but not limited to, prior exposure to invasive endoscopic
procedures, and is independent from use of PPI and antibiotics.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these findings warrant further investigation into the 
role of oral bacteria in cystic precursors to pancreatic cancer and have added
values on the aetiopathology as well as the management of pancreatic cysts.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2018-317458 
PMCID: PMC6872446
PMID: 30872392  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

