
1. Microbiologyopen. 2020 Aug;9(8):e1056. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.1056. Epub 2020 May 17.

An oral health optimized diet reduces the load of potential cariogenic and
periodontal bacterial species in the supragingival oral plaque: A randomized
controlled pilot study.

Tennert C(1)(2), Reinmuth AC(2), Bremer K(2), Al-Ahmad A(2), Karygianni L(3),
Hellwig E(2), Vach K(4), Ratka-Krüger P(2), Wittmer A(5), Woelber JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative, Preventive and Pediatric Dentistry, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, Faculty of Medicine,
Center for Dental Medicine, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg im 
Breisgau, Germany.
(3)Clinic of Preventive Dentistry, Periodontology and Cariology, Center of Dental
Medicine, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Medical Biometry and Statistics, Medical Center - University of 
Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Hygiene, Institute of Medical Microbiology and 
Hygiene, Medical Center - University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany.

This study aimed to investigate the effects of an oral health optimized diet on
the composition of the supragingival oral plaque in a randomized controlled
trial. Participants of the standard diet group (n = 5) had a diet high in
processed carbohydrates and did not change their dietary behavior during the
observation. The healthy diet group (n = 9) had to change the diet after 2 weeks 
from a diet high in processed carbohydrates to a diet low in carbohydrates, rich 
in omega-3 fatty acids, rich in vitamins C and D, antioxidants and fiber for
4 weeks. Saliva and supragingival plaque samples were taken at the end of week
two and eight of the observation period to investigate the composition of
microbiota in saliva and supragingival plaque. Data were subjected to an
exploratory analysis to identify significant differences. Statistically
significant differences were only found in the healthy diet group between the
baseline (week 2) and the final sample (week 8) for specific species in plaque
and saliva samples. A reduction of the total counts of Streptococcus mitis group,
Granulicatella adiacens, Actinomyces spp., and Fusobacterium spp. was found in
plaque samples of the healthy diet group. In saliva samples of the healthy diet
group, the total counts of Actinomyces spp. and Capnocytophaga spp. decreased. A 
diet low in carbohydrates, rich in omega-3 fatty acids, rich in vitamins C and D,
and rich in fiber reduced Streptococcus mitis group, Granulicatella adiacens,
Actinomyces spp., and Fusobacterium spp. in the supragingival plaque.

© 2020 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1056 
PMCID: PMC7424251
PMID: 32419378 

