
1. BMC Pulm Med. 2019 Dec 23;19(1):260. doi: 10.1186/s12890-019-1021-5.

Dynamics of microbiota during mechanical ventilation in aspiration pneumonia.

Otsuji K(1)(2), Fukuda K(3), Ogawa M(3), Fujino Y(4), Kamochi M(5), Saito M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan. otsujiken@clnc.uoeh-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
otsujiken@clnc.uoeh-u.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(4)Department of Environmental Epidemiology, Institute of Industrial Ecological
Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu,
Japan.
(5)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, Hospital of the University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Japan, Kitakyushu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The emergence of multi-drug resistant pathogens is an urgent
health-related problem, and the appropriate use of antibiotics is imperative. It 
is often difficult to identify the causative bacteria in patients with aspiration
pneumonia because tracheal aspirate contains contaminants of oral bacteria. We
investigated the dynamics of microbiota in mechanically ventilated patients with 
aspiration pneumonia to develop a treatment strategy.
METHODS: Twenty-two intubated patients with aspiration pneumonia were recruited. 
Saliva and tracheal aspirate of the subjects were collected at three time points:
(A) within 2 h after intubation, (B) just before administration of antibiotics,
and (C) 48-72 h after administration of antibiotics. The microbiota in each
specimen was analyzed by using the 16S rRNA gene clone library sequencing method.
Bacterial floras of the samples were analyzed by principal component analysis.
RESULTS: Principal component analysis based on the composition of genus revealed 
that although the changes of microbiota in the saliva from (A) to (B) were not
clear, the composition of anaerobes in the tracheal aspirate (B) was lower than
(A). In fact, the reduction of anaerobes, not in the saliva but in the tracheal
aspirate from (A) to (B), was confirmed by incident rate ratios estimated by a
multilevel Poisson regression model (p < 0.001). The extent of decrease in
anaerobes was fully dependent on the time difference between the sampling of
tracheal aspirate (A) and (B)-in particular, over 3 h of mechanical ventilation. 
This indicates that the alterations of microbiota (involving the reduction of
anaerobes in the lower respiratory tract) occurred during mechanical ventilation 
prior to the administration of antibiotics. After the administration of
antibiotics, Enterobacter spp., Corynebacterium spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, and Granulicatera adiacens were
predominantly detected in the tracheal aspirate (C).
CONCLUSION: The microbiota of the lower respiratory tract changes dynamically
during mechanical ventilation and during the administration of antibiotics in
intubated patients with aspiration pneumonia. Antibiotics should be selected on
the premise that dynamic changes in microbiota (involved in the reduction of
anaerobes) may occur during the mechanical ventilation in these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12890-019-1021-5 
PMCID: PMC6929358
PMID: 31870355  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

