
1. mSystems. 2020 Jul 7;5(4). pii: e00065-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00065-20.

Subspecies Niche Specialization in the Oral Microbiome Is Associated with
Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Risk.

Debelius JW(#)(1), Huang T(#)(1)(2), Cai Y(#)(3)(4), Ploner A(1), Barrett D(1),
Zhou X(5)(6), Xiao X(7), Li Y(3)(4), Liao J(8), Zheng Y(3)(4), Huang G(7), Adami 
HO(1)(9), Zeng Y(#)(10), Zhang Z(#)(7), Ye W(#)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Cancer Prevention Center, Wuzhou Red Cross Hospital, Wuzhou,
People's Republic of China.
(4)Wuzhou Health System Key Laboratory for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Etiology and 
Molecular Mechanism, Wuzhou, People's Republic of China.
(5)Life Science Institute, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic
of China.
(6)Key Laboratory of High-Incidence-Tumor Prevention & Treatment (Guangxi Medical
University), Ministry of Education, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, People's Republic of China.
(8)Cangwu Institute for Nasopharyngeal Carcinoma Control and Prevention, Wuzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(9)Clinical Effectiveness Research Group, Institute of Health, University of
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(10)State Key Laboratory for Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control,
Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(11)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden weimin.ye@ki.se.
(#)Contributed equally

Oral health and changes in the oral microbiome have been associated with both
local and systemic cancer. Poor oral hygiene is a known risk factor for
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), a virally associated head and neck cancer endemic
to southern China. We explored the relationship between NPC and the oral
microbiome using 16S rRNA sequencing in a study of 499 NPC patients and 495
population-based age and sex frequency-matched controls from an area of
endemicity of Southern China. We found a significant reduction in community
richness in cases compared to that in controls. Differences in the overall
microbial community structure between cases and controls could not be explained
by other potential confounders; disease status explained 5 times more variation
in the unweighted UniFrac distance than the next most explanatory variable. In
feature-based analyses, we identified a pair of coexcluding Granulicatella
adiacens amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) which were strongly associated with
NPC status and differed by a single nucleotide. The G. adiacens variant an
individual carried was also associated with the overall microbial community based
on beta diversity. Co-occurrence analysis suggested the two G. adiacens ASVs sit 
at the center of two coexcluding clusters of closely related organisms. Our
results suggest there are differences in the oral microbiomes between NPC
patients and healthy controls, and these may be associated with both a loss of
microbial diversity and niche specialization among closely related
commensals.IMPORTANCE The relationship between oral health and the risk of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) was previously established. However, the role of
oral microbiome has not been evaluated in the disease in a large epidemiological 
study. This paper clearly establishes a difference in the oral microbiomes
between NPC patients and healthy controls which cannot be explained by other
confounding factors. It furthermore identifies a pair of closely related
coexcluding organisms associated with the disease, highlighting the importance of
modern methods for single-nucleotide resolution in 16S rRNA sequence
characterization. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first examples
of cancer-associated niche specialization of the oral microbiome.

Copyright © 2020 Debelius et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00065-20 
PMCID: PMC7343305
PMID: 32636333 

