
1. Pathogens. 2020 Mar 25;9(4). pii: E243. doi: 10.3390/pathogens9040243.

In Vitro Anti-NTHi Activity of Haemophilin-Producing Strains of Haemophilus
haemolyticus.

Atto B(1), Latham R(2), Kunde D(1), Gell DA(2), Tristram S(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University of Tasmania, Newnham Drive, Launceston, 
TAS 7248, Australia.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Tasmania, 17 Liverpool Street, Hobart, TAS
7000, Australia.

Nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae (NTHi) is a leading causative organism of
opportunistic respiratory tract infections. However, there are currently no
effective vaccination strategies, and existing treatments are compromised by
antibiotic resistance. We previously characterized Haemophilus haemolyticus (Hh) 
strains capable of producing haemophilin (HPL), a heme-binding protein that
restricts NTHi growth by limiting its access to an essential growth factor, heme.
Thus, these strains may have utility as a probiotic therapy against NTHi
infection by limiting colonization, migration and subsequent infection in
susceptible individuals. Here, we assess the preliminary feasibility of this
approach by direct in vitro competition assays between NTHi and Hh strains with
varying capacity to produce HPL. Subsequent changes in NTHi growth rate and
fitness, in conjunction with HPL expression analysis, were employed to assess the
NTHi-inhibitory capacity of Hh strains. HPL-producing strains of Hh not only
outcompeted NTHi during short-term and extended co-culture, but also demonstrated
a growth advantage compared with Hh strains unable to produce the protein.
Additionally, HPL expression levels during competition correlated with the
NTHi-inhibitory phenotype. HPL-producing strains of Hh demonstrate significant
probiotic potential against NTHi colonization in the upper respiratory tract,
however, further investigations are warranted to demonstrate a range of other
characteristics that would support the eventual development of a probiotic.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens9040243 
PMCID: PMC7238096
PMID: 32218184 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

