
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 31;11:558482. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.558482.
eCollection 2020.

In vitro Photodynamic Therapy of Polymicrobial Biofilms Commonly Associated With 
Otitis Media.

Bair KL(1), Shafirstein G(2), Campagnari AA(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine,
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Cell Stress Biology, Photodynamic Therapy Center, Roswell Park
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(3)The Witebsky Center for Microbial Pathogenesis and Immunology, University at
Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, United States.

Otitis media (OM) is a prevalent pediatric infection characterized by painful
inflammation of the middle ear. There are more than 700 million cases of OM
diagnosed globally each year, with 50% of affected children under 5 years of age.
Further, OM is the most common reason for children to receive antibiotic
treatment in developed countries. The most recent work on this dynamic disease
indicates that biofilms and polymicrobial infections play a role in recurrent OM 
and chronic OM, which are difficult to eradicate using standard antibiotic
protocols. Antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT) is a promising new strategy 
for the treatment of resistant bacteria and persistent biofilms which lead to
chronic infections. While PDT continues to be successfully used for oncological, 
dermatological, and dental applications, our work focuses on the efficacy of aPDT
as it relates to otopathogens responsible for OM. Previous studies from our
laboratory and others have shown that non-typeable Haemophilus influenzae,
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Moraxella catarrhalis, the three most common
otopathogens, are susceptible to different forms of aPDT. However, many cases of 
OM involve multiple bacteria and to date no one has investigated the efficacy of 
this technology on these complex polymicrobial biofilms. We treated polymicrobial
biofilms of the three most common otopathogens with the photosensitizer Chlorin
e6 (Ce6) and a continuous wave 405 ± 10 nm light emitted diode. Our data show
significant bactericidal activity on polymicrobial biofilms associated with OM.
These studies indicate that aPDT warrants further analysis as a possible
treatment for OM and our results provide the foundation for future studies
designed to identify the optimal aPDT parameters for polymicrobial
biofilm-associated infections of the middle ear.

Copyright © 2020 Bair, Shafirstein and Campagnari.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.558482 
PMCID: PMC7487423
PMID: 32983076 

