
1. Biomed Res Int. 2020 Jul 1;2020:1242364. doi: 10.1155/2020/1242364. eCollection
2020.

Biliary Microbiota and Bile Acid Composition in Cholelithiasis.

Petrov VA(1), Fernández-Peralbo MA(2), Derks R(3), Knyazeva EM(4), Merzlikin
NV(5), Sazonov AE(1), Mayboroda OA(3)(6), Saltykova IV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Laboratory, Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russia.
(2)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Annex Marie Curie Building, Campus of
Rabanales, University of Córdoba, E-14071 Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, Netherlands.
(4)School of Core Engineering Education, National Research Tomsk Polytechnic
University, Tomsk, Russia.
(5)Surgical Diseases Department of Pediatric Faculty, Siberian State Medical
University, Tomsk, Russia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russia.

Background: A functional interplay between BAs and microbial composition in gut
is a well-documented phenomenon. In bile, this phenomenon is far less studied,
and with this report, we describe the interactions between the BAs and microbiota
in this complex biological matrix. Methodology. Thirty-seven gallstone disease
patients of which twenty-one with Opisthorchis felineus infection were enrolled
in the study. The bile samples were obtained during laparoscopic cholecystectomy 
for gallstone disease operative treatment. Common bile acid composition was
measured by LC-MS/MS. Gallbladder microbiota were previously analyzed with 16S
rRNA gene sequencing on Illumina MiSeq platform. The associations between bile
acid composition and microbiota were analyzed.
Results: Bile acid signature and Opisthorchis felineus infection status exert
influence on beta-diversity of bile microbial community. Direct correlations were
found between taurocholic acid, taurochenodeoxycholic acid concentrations, and
alpha-diversity of bile microbiota. Taurocholic acid and taurochenodeoxycholic
acid both show positive associations with the presence of Chitinophagaceae
family, Microbacterium and Lutibacterium genera, and Prevotella intermedia. Also,
direct associations were identified for taurocholic acid concentration and the
presence of Actinomycetales and Bacteroidales orders, Lautropia genus,
Jeotgalicoccus psychrophilus, and Haemophilus parainfluenzae as well as for
taurochenodeoxycholic acid and Acetobacteraceae family and Sphingomonas genus.
There were no differences in bile acid concentrations between O.
felineus-infected and noninfected patients. Conclusions/Significance.
Associations between diversity, taxonomic profile of bile microbiota, and bile
acid levels were evidenced in patients with cholelithiasis. Increase of
taurochenodeoxycholic acid and taurocholic acid concentration correlates with
bile microbiota alpha-diversity and appearance of opportunistic pathogens.

Copyright © 2020 Vyacheslav A. Petrov et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2020/1242364 
PMCID: PMC7352139
PMID: 32714973 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

