
1. J Ren Nutr. 2020 Sep 24. pii: S1051-2276(20)30205-3. doi:
10.1053/j.jrn.2020.07.008. [Epub ahead of print]

Associations Among Plant-Based Diet Quality, Uremic Toxins, and Gut Microbiota
Profile in Adults Undergoing Hemodialysis Therapy.

Stanford J(1), Charlton K(2), Stefoska-Needham A(2), Zheng H(3), Bird L(4), Borst
A(5), Fuller A(5), Lambert K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, School of Medicine, University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia; Illawarra Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia. Electronic address:
js096@uowmail.edu.au.
(2)Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, School of Medicine, University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia; Illawarra Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Division of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiome Medicine Center, Zhujiang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Wollongong Hospital, Illawarra Shoalhaven Local Health District, Wollongong,
New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Faculty of Science, Medicine and Health, School of Medicine, University of
Wollongong, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to evaluate associations among diet
quality, serum uremic toxin concentrations, and the gut microbiota profile in
adults undergoing hemodialysis therapy.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This is a cross-sectional analysis of baseline data from a
clinical trial involving adults receiving hemodialysis therapy. Usual dietary
intake was determined using a diet history method administered by Accredited
Practising Dietitians. Two approaches were used for diet quality assessment: (1) 
using three a priori defined plant-based diet indices-an overall plant-based diet
index (PDI), a healthy PDI, and an unhealthy PDI and (2) classification of food
group intake. Serum uremic toxins (p-cresyl sulfate and indoxyl sulfate (IS);
free and total) were determined by ultra-performance liquid chromatography. Gut
microbiota composition was established through sequencing the 16S rRNA gene in
stool samples.
RESULTS: Twenty-two adults (median age 70.5 [interquartile range: 59-76], 64%
male) were included in the final analysis. Higher adherence to the PDI was
associated with lower total IS levels (P = .028), independent of dialysis
adequacy, urinary output, and blood albumin levels. In contrast, higher adherence
to the unhealthy PDI was associated with increases in both free and total IS.
Several other direct and inverse associations between diet quality with uremic
toxins, microbial relative abundances, and diversity metrics were also
highlighted. Diet-associated taxa showed significantly different trends of
association with serum uremic toxin concentrations (P < .05). Higher adherence to
the PDI was negatively associated with relative abundances of Haemophilus and
Haemophilus parainfluenzae that were related to elevated total IS levels. In
contrast, increased intake of food items considered unhealthy, such as animal
fats, sweets and desserts, were associated with bacteria linked to higher IS and 
p-cresyl sulfate (total and free) concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: The quality of diet and food selections may influence uremic toxin
production by the gut microbiota in adults receiving hemodialysis. Well-designed 
dietary intervention trials that adopt multi-omic technologies appropriate for
the functional annotation of the gut microbiome are needed to validate our
findings and establish causality.

Copyright © 2020 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jrn.2020.07.008 
PMID: 32981834 

