
1. Cureus. 2020 Aug 23;12(8):e9976. doi: 10.7759/cureus.9976.

Acute Adult Supraglottitis: An Impending Threat to Patency of Airway and Life.

Shaikh N(1), Nawaz S(1), Ahmad K(1), Al Maslamani M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesia, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, QAT.
(2)Infectious Diseases, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, QAT.

Introduction Acute adult supraglottitis (AAS) is one of the upper airway
infections that can potentially cause upper airway obstruction and, if
not treated promptly, can be life-threatening. The widespread use of vaccines
against Hemophilus influenzae has decreased the incidence of epiglottitis in
children, whereas the incidence of AAS is on the rise. We aim to highlight the
presentation, diagnosis, and management in AAS with our study.  Patients and
Methods A retrospective analysis was performed on all patients admitted to a
tertiary health care facility surgical intensive care unit (SICU) where AAS was
identified and the demographic data, duration of symptoms, imaging studies,
management, and complications were recorded. In these patients, the diagnosis of 
AAS was confirmed by nasopharyngeal endoscopy. Data was entered in the
IBM Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS), version 23 (IBM SPSS
Statistics, Armonk, NY), and groups were compared using student t-test and
chi-square test. P values of ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Results A total of 118 patients were admitted to the SICU. The male: female ratio
was 3.9: 1. Major risk factors were smoking and drinking cold liquids. The common
presenting symptom was sore throat (89.8%). The thumb sign was positive in 65% of
the patients. Common bacteria were the Streptococcus species (11.9%). Ceftriaxone
was the most commonly prescribed inpatient antibiotic. All patients received
steroids as adjuvant therapy. Adrenaline nebulization was used in 66% of the
cases. Forty-six percent of patients required endotracheal intubation. In 10.2%
of patients, intubation was not possible and in 12.7% of patients, a tracheostomy
was done. Ludwig's angina was the most frequent complication. Patients presenting
with dysphagia and fever had a significantly higher incidence of Ludwig's angina 
(P ≤ 0.02 and 0.005, respectively). AAS patients complicating into Ludwig's
angina (severe cellulitis of submandibular, submental, and sublingual spaces) had
a significantly longer duration of symptoms, a higher incidence of streptococcal 
infection, airway interventions, and prolonged stay in an intensive care unit (p 
≤ 0.05). Conclusion Male gender, smoking, and drinking cold liquids were the risk
factors associated with AAS, and thumb sign on lateral neck soft tissue x-ray was
suggestive of it. AAS caused by Streptococcus species was a relatively serious
condition, leading to complications like Ludwig's angina.

Copyright © 2020, Shaikh et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9976 
PMCID: PMC7510521
PMID: 32983678 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

