
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Jan 20;10(1):632. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-57450-8.

Oropharyngeal microbiome of a college population following a meningococcal
disease outbreak.

Retchless AC(1), Kretz CB(2)(3), Rodriguez-Rivera LD(2), Chen A(2), Soeters
HM(2), Whaley MJ(2), Wang X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA,
USA. ymw8@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA,
USA.
(3)Division of Scientific Education and Professional Development, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(4)Division of Bacterial Diseases, National Center for Immunization and
Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA,
USA. gqe8@cdc.gov.

Asymptomatic oropharyngeal carriage of Neisseria meningitidis peaks in
adolescence and young adulthood. Following a meningococcal disease outbreak at a 
U.S. college, we profiled the oropharyngeal microbiomes of 158 students to
identify associations between bacterial community composition and meningococcal
carriage or risk factors for carriage, including male gender, smoking, and
frequent social mixing. Metagenomic shotgun sequencing identified 268 bacterial
taxa at the genus or species level, with Streptococcus, Veillonella, and Rothia
species being most abundant. Microbiome composition showed weak associations with
meningococcal carriage and risk factors for carriage. N. meningitidis abundance
was positively correlated with that of Fusobacterium nucleatum, consistent with
hypothesized propionic acid cross-feeding. Additional species had positive
abundance correlations with N. meningitidis, including Aggregatibacter
aphrophilus, Campylobacter rectus, Catonella morbi, Haemophilus haemolyticus, and
Parvimonas micra. N. meningitidis abundance was negatively correlated with
unidentified Veillonella species. Several of these species are commonly found in 
dental plaque, while N. meningitidis is primarily found in the pharynx,
suggesting that ecological interactions extend throughout the oral cavity.
Although risk factors for meningococcal carriage do not strongly impact most
bacterial species in the oropharynx, variation in the upper respiratory tract
microbiome may create conditions that are more or less favorable for N.
meningitidis carriage.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-57450-8 
PMCID: PMC6971049
PMID: 31959912 

