
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2020 Jul;26(7):944.e1-944.e7. doi:
10.1016/j.cmi.2019.11.022. Epub 2019 Dec 4.

Assessment of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole susceptibility testing methods for
fastidious Haemophilus spp.

Sierra Y(1), Tubau F(2), González-Díaz A(2), Carrera-Salinas A(1), Moleres J(3), 
Bajanca-Lavado P(4), Garmendia J(5), Domínguez MÁ(6), Ardanuy C(7), Martí S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL-UB,
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL-UB,
Barcelona, Spain; Research Network for Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Agrobiotecnología, CSIC-Gobierno, Navarra, Spain.
(4)Haemophilus Influenzae Reference Laboratory, Department of Infectious
Diseases, National Institute of Health, Lisbon, Portugal.
(5)Research Network for Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain;
Instituto de Agrobiotecnología, CSIC-Gobierno, Navarra, Spain.
(6)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL-UB,
Barcelona, Spain; Spanish Network for Research in Infectious Diseases (REIPI),
ISCIII, Madrid, Spain; Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL-UB,
Barcelona, Spain; Research Network for Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain; Department of Pathology and Experimental Therapeutics, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address:
c.ardanuy@bellvitgehospital.cat.
(8)Microbiology Department, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, IDIBELL-UB,
Barcelona, Spain; Research Network for Respiratory Diseases (CIBERES), ISCIII,
Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: smartinm@bellvitgehospital.cat.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the determinants of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
resistance with established susceptibility values for fastidious Haemophilus
spp., to provide recommendations for optimal trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
measurement.
METHODS: We collected 50 strains each of Haemophilus influenzae and Haemophilus
parainfluenzae at Bellvitge University Hospital. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
susceptibility was tested by microdilution, E-test and disc diffusion using both 
Mueller-Hinton fastidious (MH-F) medium and Haemophilus test medium (HTM)
following EUCAST and CLSI criteria, respectively. Mutations in folA, folP and
additional determinants of resistance were identified in whole-genome-sequenced
isolates.
RESULTS: Strains presented generally higher rates of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance when grown on HTM than on MH-F,
independent of the methodology used (average MIC 2.6-fold higher in H. influenzae
and 1.2-fold higher in H. parainfluenzae). The main resistance-related
determinants were as follows: I95L and F154S/V in folA; 3- and 15-bp insertions
and substitutions in folP; acquisition of sul genes; and FolA overproduction
potentially linked to mutations in -35 and -10 promoter motifs. Of note, 2 of 19 
H. influenzae strains (10.5%) and 9 of 33 H. parainfluenzae strains (27.3%) with 
mutations and assigned as resistant by microdilution were inaccurately considered
susceptible by disc diffusion. This misinterpretation was resolved by raising the
clinical resistance breakpoint of the EUCAST guidelines to ≤30 mm.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the routine use of disc diffusion, a significant number of
strains could potentially be miscategorized as susceptible to
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole despite having resistance-related mutations. A
simple modification to the current clinical resistance breakpoint given by the
EUCAST guideline for MH-F ensures correct interpretation and correlation with the
reference standard method of microdilution.

Copyright © 2019 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2019.11.022 
PMID: 31811916 

