
1. BMC Genomics. 2019 Oct 23;20(1):768. doi: 10.1186/s12864-019-6123-1.

Comparative genomic analysis of the Hafnia genus reveals an explicit evolutionary
relationship between the species alvei and paralvei and provides insights into
pathogenicity.

Yin Z(1)(2)(3), Yuan C(1)(2)(3), Du Y(1)(2)(3), Yang P(1)(2)(3), Qian C(1)(2)(3),
Wei Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang S(1)(2)(3), Huang D(4)(5)(6), Liu B(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology of the Ministry of
Education, TEDA College, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(2)TEDA institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomeics, TEDA college, Nankai
university, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology of the Ministry of
Education, TEDA College, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. 
huangdi@nankai.edu.cn.
(5)TEDA institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China. huangdi@nankai.edu.cn.
(6)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomeics, TEDA college, Nankai
university, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. huangdi@nankai.edu.cn.
(7)Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and Technology of the Ministry of
Education, TEDA College, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. 
liubin1981@nankai.edu.cn.
(8)TEDA institute of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China. liubin1981@nankai.edu.cn.
(9)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Microbial Functional Genomeics, TEDA college, Nankai
university, Tianjin, People's Republic of China. liubin1981@nankai.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The Hafnia genus is an opportunistic pathogen that has been
implicated in both nosocomial and community-acquired infections. Although Hafnia 
is fairly often isolated from clinical material, its taxonomy has remained an
unsolved riddle, and the involvement and importance of Hafnia in human disease is
also uncertain. Here, we used comparative genomic analysis to define the taxonomy
of Hafnia, identify species-specific genes that may be the result of ecological
and pathogenic specialization, and reveal virulence-related genetic profiles that
may contribute to pathogenesis.
RESULTS: One complete genome sequence and 19 draft genome sequences for Hafnia
strains were generated and combined with 27 publicly available genomes. We
provided high-resolution typing methods by constructing phylogeny and population 
structure based on single-copy core genes in combination with whole genome
average nucleotide identity to identify two distant Hafnia species (alvei and
paralvei) and one mislabeled strain. The open pan-genome and the presence of
numerous mobile genetic elements reveal that Hafnia has undergone massive gene
rearrangements. Presence of species-specific core genomes associated with
metabolism and transport suggests the putative niche differentiation between
alvei and paralvei. We also identified possession of diverse virulence-related
profiles in both Hafnia species., including the macromolecular secretion system, 
virulence, and antimicrobial resistance. In the macromolecular system, T1SS,
Flagellum 1, Tad pilus and T6SS-1 were conserved in Hafnia, whereas T4SS, T5SS,
and other T6SSs exhibited the evolution of diversity. The virulence factors in
Hafnia are related to adherence, toxin, iron uptake, stress adaptation, and
efflux pump. The identified resistance genes are associated with aminoglycoside, 
beta-lactam, bacitracin, cationic antimicrobial peptide, fluoroquinolone, and
rifampin. These virulence-related profiles identified at the genomic level
provide insights into Hafnia pathogenesis and the differentiation between alvei
and paralvei.
CONCLUSIONS: Our research using core genome phylogeny and comparative genomics
analysis of a larger collection of strains provides a comprehensive view of the
taxonomy and species-specific traits between Hafnia species. Deciphering the
genome of Hafnia strains possessing a reservoir of macromolecular secretion
systems, virulence factors, and resistance genes related to pathogenicity may
provide insights into addressing its numerous infections and devising strategies 
to combat the pathogen.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6123-1 
PMCID: PMC6806506
PMID: 31646960  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

