
1. Cureus. 2019 Dec 26;11(12):e6471. doi: 10.7759/cureus.6471.

Catheter-associated Hafnia alvei-induced Urosepsis.

Yarlagadda K(1), Shrimanker I(1), Nookala VK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center Pinnacle,
Harrisburg, USA.

Hafnia alvei, belonging to the Enterobacteriaceae family, is a gram-negative,
facultative anaerobe. The organism predominantly colonizes the gastrointestinal
tract and, less often, the tissues, urine, and catheters. A 75-year-old male
presented with a dry cough, fatigue, decreased appetite, intermittent
disorientation, and difficulty ambulating. He had a history of
self-catheterization due to urinary retention. He was scheduled to undergo
transcatheter aortic valve replacement for enterococcal endocarditis. Physical
examination was not significant for any changes. Urine analysis revealed positive
leukocyte esterase, the presence of red and white blood cells, urine bacteria,
and hyaline casts. The patient was started on empiric intravenous ceftriaxone.
Urine culture grew Hafnia alvei and he was switched over to cefepime due to
greater susceptibility. On day four, he started deteriorating clinically and was 
treated with four pressors but remained hypotensive and eventually became anuric.
The patient developed septic shock with multiple organ dysfunction syndromes.
Despite all measures, his clinical condition failed to improve, and he was
continued with comfort measures only. The literature on Hafnia alvei-induced
urosepsis is poor and fragmentary. Our patient showed resistance to most
beta-lactam antibiotics, including cefuroxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime,
along with intermediate susceptibility to piperacillin/tazobactam and was managed
with intravenous cefepime based on the sensitivity report. Inducible Bush group 1
beta-lactamase produced by Hafnia alvei is postulated to be responsible for
antibiotic resistance. Physicians should remain vigilant of Hafnia alvei-induced 
urosepsis in patients with long-term catheterization initiating appropriate
treatment.

Copyright © 2019, Yarlagadda et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.6471 
PMCID: PMC6984190
PMID: 32025398 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

