
1. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2020 Sep 30. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-20-0348. [Epub ahead of print]

Development of Helicobacter pylori Whole-Proteome Arrays and Identification of
Serologic Biomarkers for Noncardia Gastric Cancer in the MCC-Spain Study.

Jeske R(1)(2), Reininger D(3), Turgu B(3), Brauer A(3), Harmel C(3), Fernández de
Larrea-Baz N(4)(5), Martín V(5)(6), Moreno V(5)(7), Kogevinas M(5)(8), Pollán
M(4)(5), Hoheisel JD(9), Waterboer T(3), Butt J(3), Aragonés N(5)(10), Hufnagel
K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. r.jeske@dkfz.de.
(2)Faculty of Biosciences, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Environmental and Cancer Epidemiology Area, National Center of Epidemiology,
Carlos III Health Institute (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Epidemiología y Salud Pública
(CIBERESP)-CIBER of Epidemiology and Public Health (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.
(6)The Research Group in Gene-Environment and Health Interactions, University of 
León, León, Spain.
(7)Cancer Prevention and Control Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO),
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(8)ISGlobal, Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL),
Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Functional Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(10)Epidemiology Section, Division of Public Health, Department of Health,
Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) is a bacterial carcinogen and the
leading risk factor for noncardia gastric cancer (NCGC). Detecting antibodies
against specific H. pylori proteins in peripheral blood can be applied to
characterize infection and determine disease associations. Most studies analyzing
the association between H. pylori infection and gastric cancer have focused on
previously identified antigens, predominantly the virulence factor
cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA). Selecting antigens in an unbiased approach
may, however, allow the identification of novel biomarkers.
METHODS: Using a combination of multiple spotting technique and cell-free,
on-chip protein expression, we displayed the H. pylori genome (strain 26695) on
high-density microarrays. Immunogenic proteins were identified by serum pool
incubations and henceforth analyzed in individual samples. To test its
applicability, we used sera from a multicase-control (MCC)-Spain study. Serologic
responses between NCGC cases and controls were assessed by conditional logistic
regression estimating ORs and 95% confidence intervals.
RESULTS: We successfully expressed 93% of the 1,440 H. pylori open reading frames
in situ. Of these, 231 (17%) were found to be immunogenic. By comparing 58 NCGC
cases with 58 matched controls, we confirmed a higher seroprevalence of CagA
among cases (66%) than controls (31%). We further identified a potential novel
marker, the Helicobacter outer membrane protein A (HopA).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we provide evidence that our H. pylori whole-proteome
microarray offers a platform for unbiased de novo identification of serologic
biomarkers.
IMPACT: Given its versatile workflow, antibody responses against other H. pylori 
strains and possible associations with diverse H. pylori-related outcomes can be 
systematically analyzed.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-20-0348 
PMID: 32998950 

