
1. World J Gastrointest Endosc. 2020 Sep 16;12(9):297-303. doi:
10.4253/wjge.v12.i9.297.

Endoscopic approach to gastric remnant outlet obstruction after gastric bypass: A
case report.

Zarrin A(1), Sorathia S(2), Choksi V(2), Kaplan SR(2), Kasmin F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Aventura Hospital and Medical Center, Miami, 
FL 33180, United States. arash.zarrin@hcahealthcare.com.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Aventura Hospital and Medical Center, Miami,
FL 33180, United States.

BACKGROUND: Acute gastric remnant bleeding is a rare complication of bariatric
surgery. Furthermore, acute bleeding from the gastric remnant resulting in
gastric remnant outlet obstruction has not been described previously. Endoscopic 
management of gastric remnant bleed has been challenging due to difficulty
accessing the excluded stomach. Traditionally, this necessitates surgical
intervention. Recently, however, the adoption of endoscopic ultrasound-directed
transgastric intervention provides an alternative approach to management.
CASE SUMMARY: A 65-year-old male with a prior gastric bypass presented with the
sudden onset of progressive abdominal distension, nausea, and melena of two days 
duration. His imaging illustrated a massively distended stomach. A nasogastric
tube did not result in drainage of fluid or decompression of his abdomen. His
endoscopy revealed a normal-appearing gastro-jejunal anastomosis and confirmed
the distended "fluid"-filled gastric remnant. An endoscopic ultrasound-directed
gastrogastrostomy was created to decompress the gastric remnant. Two liters of
blood was suctioned before a large adherent clot was visualized in the gastric
antrum. The patient underwent emergent angiography with embolization of the
gastroduodenal artery. He was discharged with a stable hemoglobin level and
resolution of symptoms. Healing superficial gastric ulcers were visualized on a
follow-up endoscopy. Gastric biopsies were consistent with Helicobacter pylori
infection for which the patient was treated, and successful eradication was
achieved.
CONCLUSION: This patient benefited from a timely diagnosis and effective therapy 
of an acute gastric remnant obstruction from a bleeding ulcer with endoscopic
ultrasound-directed transgastric intervention.

©The Author(s) 2020. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.4253/wjge.v12.i9.297 
PMCID: PMC7503611
PMID: 32994860 

