
1. Helicobacter. 2020 Oct 2:e12756. doi: 10.1111/hel.12756. [Epub ahead of print]

Associations between Helicobacter pylori with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
and other metabolic conditions in Guatemala.

Alvarez CS(1), Florio AA(1), Butt J(2), Rivera-Andrade A(3), Kroker-Lobos MF(3), 
Waterboer T(2), Camargo MC(1), Freedman ND(1), Graubard BI(1), Lazo M(4)(5),
Guallar E(6), Groopman JD(6)(7), Ramírez-Zea M(3), McGlynn KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
Rockville, MD, USA.
(2)Infections and Cancer Epidemiology, Infection, Inflammation and Cancer
Research Program, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Research Center for the Prevention of Chronic Diseases, Institute of Nutrition
of Central America and Panama (INCAP), Guatemala City, Guatemala.
(4)Division of General Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Urban Health Collaborative, Dornsife School of Public Health, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(7)Department of Environmental Health and Engineering, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have suggested an association between Helicobacter
pylori (H pylori) and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The aim of the
current study was to examine the association in Guatemala, a region with elevated
prevalences of both H pylori and NAFLD. Associations between H pylori and other
metabolic conditions were also examined, as were associations between H hepaticus
and H bilis and the metabolic conditions.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The analysis included 424 participants from a
cross-sectional study in Guatemala. H pylori seropositivity was defined as
positivity for ≥ 4 antigens. Seropositivities for H bilis and H hepaticus were
defined as positivity for ≥ 2 antigens. NAFLD was estimated using the Fatty Liver
Index and the Hepatic Steatosis Index. Other conditions examined were obesity,
central obesity, hypercholesterolemia, low HDL, diabetes and metabolic syndrome
(MetSyn). Prevalence odds ratios (POR) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were
estimated.
RESULTS: No overall associations between H pylori, H hepaticus, or H bilis and
NAFLD or related metabolic conditions were found. Seropositivity for H pylori
antigens CagA and VacA and H hepaticus antigen HH0713 was each significantly
associated with NAFLD, however. In addition, associations were observed between
the H pylori antigens HyuA, HP1564, and UreA and specified metabolic conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: While no overall associations between H pylori or Helicobacter
species with NAFLD or related conditions were observed, some selected
Helicobacter spp. antigens were associated with NAFLD. Further research is
warranted to examine whether H. species are associated with any metabolic
condition.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hel.12756 
PMID: 33006810 

