
1. Gut. 2020 Oct 1. pii: gutjnl-2020-322368. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322368. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Screening and eradication of Helicobacter pylori for gastric cancer prevention:
the Taipei global consensus.

Liou JM(#)(1)(2)(3), Malfertheiner P(#)(4)(5), Lee YC(1)(2)(6), Sheu BS(7)(8),
Sugano K(9), Cheng HC(7)(10), Yeoh KG(11), Hsu PI(12), Goh KL(13), Mahachai
V(14), Gotoda T(15), Chang WL(7), Chen MJ(1)(2)(16), Chiang TH(1)(2)(16), Chen
CC(1)(2), Wu CY(17)(18), Leow AH(13), Wu JY(8), Wu DC(8), Hong TC(1)(2)(19), Lu
H(20), Yamaoka Y(21)(22), Megraud F(23), Chan FKL(24)(25), Sung JJ(24)(25), Lin
JT(1)(26), Graham DY(22), Wu MS(27)(2), El-Omar EM(28)(29); Asian Pacific
Alliance on Helicobacter and Microbiota (APAHAM).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases,
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine II, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany.
(6)Department of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine and Institute of Clinical Medicine, National
Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.
(10)Department of Internal Medicine, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and
Welfare, Tainan, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore.
(12)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
An Nan Hospital, China Medical University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.
(14)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University and
King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(15)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Nihon
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Integrated Diagnostics and Therapeutics, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(17)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(18)Division of Translational Research, Department of Medical Research, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital Bei-Hu
Branch, Taipei, Taiwan.
(20)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Key Laboratory of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Renji
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(21)Oita University Faculty of Medicine, Yufu, Oita, Japan.
(22)Department of Medicine, Michael E DeBakey VA Medical Center and Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(23)French National Reference Centre for Helicobacters, Bacteriology laboratory, 
Pellegrin Hospital, Bordeaux, & INSERM U1053, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux,
France.
(24)Institute of Digestive Disease, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong
Kong, China.
(25)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(26)Digestive Medicine Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.
(27)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan mingshiang@ntu.edu.tw.
(28)Department of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(29)Microbiome Research Centre, St George & Sutherland Clinical School,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: A global consensus meeting was held to review current evidence and
knowledge gaps and propose collaborative studies on population-wide screening and
eradication of Helicobacter pylori for prevention of gastric cancer (GC).
METHODS: 28 experts from 11 countries reviewed the evidence and modified the
statements using the Delphi method, with consensus level predefined as ≥80% of
agreement on each statement. The Grading of Recommendation Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach was followed.
RESULTS: Consensus was reached in 26 statements. At an individual level,
eradication of H. pylori reduces the risk of GC in asymptomatic subjects and is
recommended unless there are competing considerations. In cohorts of vulnerable
subjects (eg, first-degree relatives of patients with GC), a screen-and-treat
strategy is also beneficial. H. pylori eradication in patients with early GC
after curative endoscopic resection reduces the risk of metachronous cancer and
calls for a re-examination on the hypothesis of 'the point of no return'. At the 
general population level, the strategy of screen-and-treat for H. pylori
infection is most cost-effective in young adults in regions with a high incidence
of GC and is recommended preferably before the development of atrophic gastritis 
and intestinal metaplasia. However, such a strategy may still be effective in
people aged over 50, and may be integrated or included into national healthcare
priorities, such as colorectal cancer screening programmes, to optimise the
resources. Reliable locally effective regimens based on the principles of
antibiotic stewardship are recommended. Subjects at higher risk of GC, such as
those with advanced gastric atrophy or intestinal metaplasia, should receive
surveillance endoscopy after eradication of H. pylori.
CONCLUSION: Evidence supports the proposal that eradication therapy should be
offered to all individuals infected with H. pylori. Vulnerable subjects should be
tested, and treated if the test is positive. Mass screening and eradication of H.
pylori should be considered in populations at higher risk of GC.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-322368 
PMID: 33004546 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: J-ML reports receiving
lecture fees from Takeda Pharmaceuticals (Taiwan) and Abbott Laboratories. PM
reports receiving advisory and lecture fees from Bayer, Mayoly Spindler and
Nordmark. DYG is a consultant for RedHill Biopharma and Phathom Pharmaceuticals
regarding novel H. pylori therapies and has received research support for culture
of Helicobacter pylori.

