
1. BMC Infect Dis. 2020 Oct 2;20(1):725. doi: 10.1186/s12879-020-05432-6.

The University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences (UZ-CHS) BIRTH COHORT
study: rationale, design and methods.

Duri K(1), Gumbo FZ(2), Munjoma PT(3), Chandiwana P(4), Mhandire K(5), Ziruma
A(6), Macpherson A(7), Rusakaniko S(8), Gomo E(4)(9), Misselwitz B(7), Mazengera 
LR(3); UZ-CHS Birth Cohort Team.

Collaborators: Altfeld M, Bunders M, Rowland Jones S, Dandara C, Mleya V,
Mutambara J, Kandawasvika G, Kuona P, Chimhuya S, Nyamakura R, Mtapuri-Zinyowera 
S, Chandiwana SP, Marashiki C, Mataramvura H, Mazengera E, Taremeredzwa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences
(UZ-CHS), P.O. Box A178 Avondale, Harare, Zimbabwe. kduri@medsch.uz.ac.zw.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(3)Department of Immunology, University of Zimbabwe College of Health Sciences
(UZ-CHS), P.O. Box A178 Avondale, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(4)UZ-CHS Research Support Centre, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(5)Department of Chemical Pathology, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(7)Clinic for Visceral Surgery and Medicine, Inselspital Bern and Bern
University, Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Community Medicine, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.
(9)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, UZ-CHS, Harare, Zimbabwe.

BACKGROUND: Commencing lifelong antiretroviral therapy (ART) immediately
following HIV diagnosis (Option B+), has greatly improved maternal-infant health.
Thus, large and increasing numbers of HIV-infected women are on ART during
pregnancy, a situation concurrently increasing numbers of HIV-exposed-uninfected 
(HEU) infants. Compared to their HIV-unexposed-uninfected (HUU) counterparts, HEU
infants show higher rates of adverse birth outcomes, mortality,
infectious/non-communicable diseases including impaired growth and neurocognitive
development. There is an urgent need to understand the impact of HIV and early
life ART exposures, immune-metabolic dysregulation, comorbidities and
environmental confounders on adverse paediatric outcomes.
METHODS: Six hundred (600) HIV-infected and 600 HIV-uninfected pregnant women
≥20 weeks of gestation will be enrolled from four primary health centres in high 
density residential areas of Harare. Participants will be followed up as
mother-infant-pairs at delivery, week(s) 1, 6, 10, 14, 24, 36, 48, 72 and 96
after birth. Clinical, socio-economic, nutritional and environmental data will be
assessed for adverse birth outcomes, impaired growth, immune/neurodevelopment,
vertical transmission of HIV, hepatitis-B/C viruses, cytomegalovirus and
syphilis. Maternal urine, stool, plasma, cord blood, amniotic fluid, placenta and
milk including infant plasma, dried blood spot and stool will be collected at
enrolment and follow-up visits. The composite primary endpoint is stillbirth and 
infant mortality within the first two years of life in HEU versus HUU infants.
Maternal mortality in HIV-infected versus -uninfected women is another primary
outcome. Secondary endpoints include a range of maternal and infant outcomes.
Sub-studies will address maternal stress and malnutrition, maternal-infant latent
tuberculosis, Helicobacter pylori infections, immune-metabolomic dysregulation
including gut, breast milk and amniotic fluid dysbiosis.
DISCUSSION: The University of Zimbabwe-College of Health-Sciences-Birth-Cohort
study will provide a comprehensive assessment of risk factors and biomarkers for 
HEU infants' adverse outcomes. This will ultimately help developing strategies to
mitigate effects of maternal HIV, early-life ART exposures and comorbidities on
infants' mortality and morbidity.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrial.gov Identifier: NCT04087239 . Registered 12
September 2019.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-020-05432-6 
PMID: 33008316 

