
1. Yale J Biol Med. 2020 Sep 30;93(4):487-493. eCollection 2020 Sep.

Helicobacter Pylori Infection in Amniotic Fluid May Cause Hyperemesis Gravidarum.

Aydın M(1), Tolunay HE(2), Varlı EN(2), Boza B(3), Şahin Ö(4), Özer S(5), Dülger 
AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Van Yuzuncu Yil University, School of Medicine, Department of
Gastroenterology, Van, Turkey.
(2)Etlik Zübeyde Hanım Maternity and Women's Health Teaching and Research
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Mardin State Hospital, Department of Perinatology, Artuklu/Mardin, Turkey.
(4)Ufuk University, School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Private Defne Hospital, Department of Gastroenterology, Turkey.

Objectives: Limited data are available from recent trials involving pregnant
women to guide Helicobacter pylori infection diagnosis. There are no data about
the presence of H. pylori in the amniotic fluid as well. Furthermore, the
relation between amniotic fluid H. pylori and hyperemesis gravidarum (HG) has not
been characterized yet. Materials and Methods: This is a prospective study
conducted after obtaining approval from the Ethics Committee. Pregnant women
undergoing amniocentesis were enrolled in the study. The stool antigen test
assessed the presence of H. pylori in amniotic fluid. A perinatologist
independently performed an amniocentesis. The obtained amniotic liquid was sent
to the laboratory to evaluate H. pylori infection by stool H. pylori antigen
assay. We determined the rate of H. pylori in amniotic fluid and assessed
relations between H. pylori infection and pregnancy outcome, including HG.
Results: Between May and September 2017, we enrolled 48 pregnant women who
underwent amniocentesis to detect possible fetal malformations. Patients were
divided into two groups regarding the HG status. There were significant
differences between the groups in terms of H. pylori infection presence. Among
them, 28 (58.3%) were found to have a positive H. pylori test in their amniotic
fluid. The rate of HG was significantly higher (71.4%) in patients who tested
positive for H. pylori in amniocentesis than the H. pylori-negative group (20%), 
(p<0.001). Conclusions: The study's main new finding is that presence of H.
pylori in the amniotic fluid is possible. Our data suggest that H.
pylori-infected amniotic fluid is associated with the experience of past HG. The 
current study may have important implications for HG detection and help identify 
patients who would benefit from future preventive strategies.

Copyright ©2020, Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine.


PMCID: PMC7513450
PMID: 33005113 

