
1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2020 Apr-Jun;9(2):173-175. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_62_20.

Susceptibility of the Mycobacterium abscessus complex to drying: Implications for
nebulizer hygiene in patients with cystic fibrosis.

Moore JE(1), Millar BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Northern Ireland Public Health Laboratory, Belfast
City Hospital, Belfast; School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster University,
Coleraine; School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Science, The
Wellcome.Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, Queenfs University,
Belfast, Northern Ireland.

Background: Nebulizer hygiene and care is important in cystic fibrosis (CF) to
minimize device contamination from bacteria, including nontuberculous
mycobacteria (NTMs). Most nebulizer manufacturers recommend nebulizer drying,
however there is little evidence to understand how nebulizer drying affects NTM
survival.
Methods: Mycobacterium abscessus subsp. massiliense (n = 2), M. abscessus subsp. 
bolletii (n = 2), and M. abscessus subsp. abscessus (n = 2) were evaluated for
their ability to survive simulated drying conditions associated with routine
nebulizer care. Bacterial inocula (circa. 107 colony-forming units) were added to
plastic and allowed to dry to completeness for 24 h, employing passive and active
drying.
Results: NTM isolates of all subspecies could be recovered from all passive and
active drying experiments, both in diluent and in sterile sputum, following
drying (24 h). There was no combination of drying or physiology that supported
NTM cell death, and there was no difference in observed survival with the three
species of M. abscessus examined.
Conclusion: This study indicates that drying, either passively or actively, for
24 h at room temperature, is unable to eradicate all M. abscessus organisms from 
dry plastic surfaces, even in the presence of residual sputum contamination.
Whilst drying may be advantageous for nebulizer performance, it should not be
regarded as an absolute control for the elimination of NTM organisms. With
nebulizer hygiene, NTM organisms would be able to survive on a nebulizer
following drying for 24 h, which has not undergone any formal disinfection
protocol. Therefore, for NTM eradication from washed nebulizers, CF patients
should therefore seek an effective alternative control to drying for NTM
eradication, i.e., heat disinfection in baby bottle disinfectors. CF patients and
health-care professionals should not rely solely on nebulizer drying to achieve
NTM eradication.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_62_20 
PMID: 32474539 

Conflict of interest statement: None

