
1. J Glob Antimicrob Resist. 2020 Jun;21:294-295. doi: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.030.
Epub 2020 May 6.

Novel mutations in the resistome of a new sequence type (ST262) of clarithromycin
resistant Mycobacterium abscessus subsp. massiliense.

Dos Santos Carneiro M(1), de Lima-Morales D(2), Crispim MN(2), de Souza Nunes
L(3), Barth AL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Faculdade de Farmácia,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil;
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Resistência Bacteriana (LABRESIS), Centro de Pesquisa 
Experimental, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Pesquisa em Resistência Bacteriana (LABRESIS), Centro de
Pesquisa Experimental, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre,
RS, Brazil.
(3)Universidade Federal do Pampa (UNIPAMPA), Uruguaiana, RS, Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Faculdade de Farmácia,
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil;
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Resistência Bacteriana (LABRESIS), Centro de Pesquisa 
Experimental, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, RS,
Brazil. Electronic address: albarth@hcpa.edu.br.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between
antimicrobial susceptibility and genotype of a Mycobacterium abscessus subsp.
massiliense isolate obtained from the respiratory tract of a patient in southern 
Brazil.
METHODS: The isolate (named Myco1POA) was submitted to whole-genome sequencing
using an Illumina MiSeq platform. Data were analysed using Trim Galore!, SPAdes
Genome Assembler, Geneious and BioEdit software. Multilocus sequence typing
(MLST) was performed by in silico analysis of seven housekeeping genes according 
to the Institut Pasteur database. The antimicrobial susceptibility profile was
determined by broth microdilution according to Clinical and Laboratory Standards 
Institute (CLSI) guidelines.
RESULTS: Several mutations in genes related to antimicrobial resistance were
identified in Myco1POA. MLST indicated that the isolate belonged to a novel
sequence type (ST), which was designated ST262. Phenotypic susceptibility and
genotypic findings were concordant, except for clarithromycin [erm(41) and rrl
genes].
CONCLUSION: Here we describe the genome sequence of M. abscessus subsp.
massiliense Myco1POA identified as a novel sequence type (ST262) and indicate
possible new gene mutations leading to clarithromycin resistance.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgar.2020.04.030 
PMID: 32387639 

