
1. Clin Nutr. 2020 Jun 3. pii: S0261-5614(20)30260-0. doi:
10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.025. [Epub ahead of print]

Acute and chronic improvement in postprandial glucose metabolism by a diet
resembling the traditional Mediterranean dietary pattern: Can SCFAs play a role?

Vitale M(1), Giacco R(2), Laiola M(3), Della Pepa G(1), Luongo D(4), Mangione
A(1), Salamone D(1), Vitaglione P(5), Ercolini D(5), Rivellese AA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, "Federico II" University of Naples,
Italy.
(2)CNR-Institute of Food Sciences, Avellino, Italy.
(3)Dept. of Agricultural Sciences, "Federico II" University of Naples, Italy.
(4)CNR-Institute of Biostructures and Bioimaging, Naples, Italy.
(5)Dept. of Agricultural Sciences, "Federico II" University of Naples, Italy;
Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples "Federico II", Naples,
Italy.
(6)Dept. of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, "Federico II" University of Naples,
Italy; Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University of Naples "Federico II",
Naples, Italy. Electronic address: rivelles@unina.it.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Postprandial metabolic abnormalities are considered important 
and independent risk factors for cardiovascular diseases. However, the effects of
the Mediterranean diet on postprandial metabolism and the mechanism underpinning 
the effects on clinical variables have not been exhaustively explored. Therefore,
the aims of the present study were to evaluate the acute and medium-term effects 
(8 weeks) on postprandial glucose and lipid metabolism of a diet resembling a
typical Mediterranean diet (Med-D) compared to a western-type diet (Control-D),
and the mechanisms underlying those effects.
METHODS: Twenty-nine overweight/obese individuals of both genders, aged 20-60
years, were enrolled and randomly assigned to two isoenergetic dietary
interventions: 1) a Med-D (n = 16), and 2) a Control-D (n = 13). Adherence to the
dietary interventions was assessed by a 7-day food record. A meal test resembling
the assigned diet was performed at baseline and after 8 weeks of intervention.
Blood samples at fasting and over 4-h after the meal were collected to assess
metabolic parameters and short chain fatty acid (SCFA) levels. Fecal samples were
also collected to evaluate the microbiota composition.
RESULTS: Glucose and insulin responses were significantly reduced at baseline
after the Med test meal compared to the Control meal (p < 0.05) and this effect
was strengthened after 8 weeks of intervention with the Mediterranean diet
(p < 0.05); together with an improvement in OGIS. At the end of the intervention,
postprandial plasma butyric acid incremental area under the curve (IAUC) was
significantly increased in the Med-D group (p = 0.019) and correlated inversely
with plasma insulin IAUC and directly with oral glucose insulin sensitivity
(OGIS) (r: -0.411, p = 0.046 and r: 0.397, p = 0.050 respectively). These
metabolic changes were accompanied by significant changes in gut microbiota, such
as an increase in the relative abundance of Intestinimonas butyriciproducens and 
Akkermansia muciniphila (p < 0.05) in the Med-D compared to Control-D group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides strong evidence that a diet resembling the
traditional Med-D improves postprandial glucose metabolism and insulin
sensitivity. Furthermore, the study highlights a possible involvement of gut
microbiota metabolites - such as butyric acid, and of dietary fiber as a
precursor - in improving glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.05.025 
PMID: 32698959 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

