
1. New Microbiol. 2020 Jul;43(3):127-132. Epub 2020 Jun 13.

Molecular characterization of Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies isolated from
patients attending an Italian Cystic Fibrosis Centre.

Teri A(1), Sottotetti S(1), Arghittu M(1), Girelli D(1), Biffi A(1), D'Accico
M(1), Daccò V(2), Gambazza S(2)(3), Pizzamiglio G(4), Trovato A(5), Tortoli E(5),
Colombo C(6), Cariani L(1).

Author information: 
(1)UOS Microbiology and Cystic Fibrosis Microbiology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Cystic Fibrosis Center, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Università degli Studi di Milano, Department of Clinical Sciences and
Community Health, Milano, Italy.
(4)Respiratory Disease Department, Cystic Fibrosis Center Adult Section,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(5)Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milan, Italy.
(6)Cystic Fibrosis Center, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore
Policlinico, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Mycobacterium abscessus (MABS) infection represents significant management
challenge in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. This retrospective study (2005-2016) 
aims to determine the prevalence of the subspecies of MABS isolated from CF
patients, to evaluate the persistence over the years of a single subspecies of
MABS and to correlate mutations responsible for macrolides and amikacin
resistance with MIC values. We investigated 314 strains (1 isolate/patient/year) 
isolated from the lower respiratory tract of 51 chronically infected CF patients.
Sequencing of rpoB gene was performed to identify the MABS subspecies. The
erm(41) gene was sequenced to differentiate the strains with and without
inducible macrolide resistance. Regions of 23S and 16S rRNA were sequenced to
investigate mutations responsible for constitutive resistance to macrolides and
aminoglycosides, respectively. Antibiotic susceptibility, using commercial
microdilution plates, was evaluated according to CLSI. M. abscessus subsp.
abscessus accounted for 64% of the isolates, bolletii subspecies for 16% and
massiliense subspecies for 20%. All the massiliense strains presented truncated
erm(41) gene while 12 abscessus strains presented the mutation T28->C in the
erm(41) gene, which makes it inactive. The 23S rRNA analysis did not show
constitutive resistance to macrolides in any strain. Mutation of the 16S rRNA
gene was highlighted in 2 strains out of 314, in agreement with high MIC values. 
The correct identification at the subspecies level and the molecular analysis of 
23S rRNA, 16S rRNA and erm gene is useful to guide the treatment strategy in
patients with M. abscessus lung infection.


PMID: 32656572 

