
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Jan 20;701:134684. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134684. 
Epub 2019 Oct 28.

Naturally-diverse airborne environmental microbial exposures modulate the gut
microbiome and may provide anxiolytic benefits in mice.

Liddicoat C(1), Sydnor H(2), Cando-Dumancela C(2), Dresken R(2), Liu J(3), Gellie
NJC(2), Mills JG(2), Young JM(4), Weyrich LS(5), Hutchinson MR(3), Weinstein
P(2), Breed MF(6).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and the Environment Institute, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia. Electronic address:
craig.liddicoat@adelaide.edu.au.
(2)School of Biological Sciences and the Environment Institute, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.
(3)Adelaide Medical School, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia
5005, Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale
BioPhotonics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005,
Australia.
(4)School of Biological Sciences and the Environment Institute, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia; College of Science and
Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia.
(5)Australian Centre for Ancient DNA, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia; Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for
Australian Biodiversity and Heritage, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South
Australia 5005, Australia.
(6)School of Biological Sciences and the Environment Institute, The University of
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia; College of Science and
Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park, South Australia 5042, Australia. 
Electronic address: martin.breed@flinders.edu.au.

Growing epidemiological evidence links natural green space exposure with a range 
of health benefits, including for mental health. Conversely, greater urbanisation
associates with increased risk of mental health disorders. Microbiomes are
proposed as an important but understudied link that may help explain many green
space-human health associations. However, there remains a lack of controlled
experimental evidence testing possible beneficial effects from passive exposure
to natural biodiversity via airborne microbiota. Previous mouse model studies
have used unrealistic environmental microbial exposures-including excessive soil 
and organic matter contact, feed supplements and injections-to demonstrate host
microbiota, immune biomarker, and behavioural changes. Here, in a randomised
controlled experiment, we demonstrate that realistic exposures to trace-level
dust from a high biodiversity soil can change mouse gut microbiota, in comparison
to dust from low biodiversity soil or no soil (control) (n = 54 total mice,
comprising 3 treatments × 18 mice, with 9 females + 9 males per group).
Furthermore, we found a nominal soil-derived anaerobic spore-forming
butyrate-producer, Kineothrix alysoides, was supplemented to a greater extent in 
the gut microbiomes of high biodiversity treatment mice. Also, increasing
relative abundance of this rare organism correlated with reduced anxiety-like
behaviour in the most anxious mice. Our results point to an intriguing new
hypothesis: that biodiverse soils may represent an important supplementary source
of butyrate-producing bacteria capable of resupplying the mammalian gut
microbiome, with potential for gut health and mental health benefits. Our
findings have potential to inform cost-effective population health interventions 
through microbiome-conscious green space design and, ultimately, the
mainstreaming of biodiversity into health care.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.134684 
PMID: 31704402  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

