
1. PeerJ. 2020 Sep 16;8:e9894. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9894. eCollection 2020.

Biological function of Klebsiella variicola and its effect on the rhizosphere
soil of maize seedlings.

Yang L(1)(2), Yang K(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agronomy, Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural University, Daqing,
Heilongjiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Crop Germplasm Improvement and Cultivation in Cold Regions
of Education Department, Daqing, Heilongjiang, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Graduate, Heilongjiang Bayi Agricultural University, Daqing,
Heilongjiang, People's Republic of China.

Background: Deterioration of the ecological environment in recent years has led
to increasing soil salinization, which severely affects the cultivation of
agricultural crops. While research has focused on improving soil environment
through the application of pollution-free microbial fertilizers, there are
relatively few plant growth-promoting bacteria suitable for saline-alkali
environments. Although Klebsiella variicola can adapt to saline-alkali
environments to successfully colonize rhizosphere microenvironments, only a few
studies have investigated its role in promoting crop growth. Its effect on the
crop rhizosphere soil microenvironment is especially unclear.
Methods: In this study, the biological function of K. variicola and its
colonization in maize seedling rhizosphere soil were studied in detail through
selective media and ultraviolet spectrophotometry. The effects of K. variicola on
the rhizosphere soil microenvironment and the growth of maize seedlings in
saline-alkali and neutral soils were systematically analysed using the
colorimetric method, the potassium dichromate volumetric method, and the
diffusion absorption method.
Results: Our results showed that K. variicola played a role in indole acetic
acid, acetoin, ammonia, phosphorus, and potassium production, as well as in
nitrogen fixation. A high level of colonization was observed in the rhizosphere
soil of maize seedlings. Following the application of K. variicola in neutral and
saline-alkali soils, the nutrient composition of rhizosphere soil of maize
seedlings increased in varying degrees, more notably in saline-alkali soil. The
content of organic matter, alkali-hydrolysable nitrogen, available phosphorus,
available potassium, alkaline phosphatase, sucrase, urease, and catalase
increased by 64.22%, 117.39%, 175.64%, 28.63%, 146.08%, 76.77%, 86.60%, and
45.29%, respectively, insaline-alkalisoil.
Conclusion: K.variicola, therefore, performed a variety of biological functions
to promote the growth of maize seedlings and effectively improve the level of
soil nutrients and enzymes in the rhizosphere of maize seedlings,
undersaline-alkali stress conditions. It played an important role in enhancing
the rhizosphere microenvironment of maize seedlings under saline-alkali stress.

©2020 Yang and Yang.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9894 
PMCID: PMC7501803
PMID: 32995084 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

