
1. mBio. 2020 Sep 29;11(5). pii: e01733-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01733-20.

Klebsiella pneumoniae Reduces SUMOylation To Limit Host Defense Responses.

Sá-Pessoa J(1), Przybyszewska K(1), Vasconcelos FN(1), Dumigan A(1), Frank CG(1),
Hobley L(1), Bengoechea JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United
Kingdom.
(2)Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, United
Kingdom j.bengoechea@qub.ac.uk.

Klebsiella pneumoniae is an important cause of multidrug-resistant infections
worldwide. Understanding the virulence mechanisms of K. pneumoniae is a priority 
and timely to design new therapeutics. Here, we demonstrate that K. pneumoniae
limits the SUMOylation of host proteins in epithelial cells and macrophages
(mouse and human) to subvert cell innate immunity. Mechanistically, in lung
epithelial cells, Klebsiella increases the levels of the deSUMOylase SENP2 in the
cytosol by affecting its K48 ubiquitylation and its subsequent degradation by the
ubiquitin proteasome. This is dependent on Klebsiella preventing the NEDDylation 
of the Cullin-1 subunit of the ubiquitin ligase complex E3-SCF-βTrCP by
exploiting the CSN5 deNEDDylase. Klebsiella induces the expression of CSN5 in an 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K)-protein kinase B (AKT)-extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)-glycogen synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3β) signaling pathway-dependent manner.
In macrophages, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-TRAM-TRIF-induced type I interferon
(IFN) via IFN receptor 1 (IFNAR1)-controlled signaling mediates
Klebsiella-triggered decrease in the levels of SUMOylation via let-7 microRNAs
(miRNAs). Our results revealed the crucial role played by Klebsiella
polysaccharides, the capsule, and the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) O-polysaccharide, 
to decrease the levels of SUMO-conjugated proteins in epithelial cells and
macrophages. A Klebsiella-induced decrease in SUMOylation promotes infection by
limiting the activation of inflammatory responses and increasing intracellular
survival in macrophages.IMPORTANCE Klebsiella pneumoniae has been singled out as 
an urgent threat to human health due to the increasing isolation of strains
resistant to "last-line" antimicrobials, narrowing the treatment options against 
Klebsiella infections. Unfortunately, at present, we cannot identify candidate
compounds in late-stage development for treatment of multidrug-resistant
Klebsiella infections; this pathogen is exemplary of the mismatch between unmet
medical needs and the current antimicrobial research and development pipeline.
Furthermore, there is still limited evidence on K. pneumoniae pathogenesis at the
molecular and cellular levels in the context of the interactions between
bacterial pathogens and their hosts. In this research, we have uncovered a
sophisticated strategy employed by Klebsiella to subvert the activation of immune
defenses by controlling the modification of proteins. Our research may open
opportunities to develop new therapeutics based on counteracting this
Klebsiella-controlled immune evasion strategy.

Copyright © 2020 Sá-Pessoa et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01733-20 
PMID: 32994335 

