
1. Ocul Surf. 2020 Jun 1. pii: S1542-0124(20)30088-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jtos.2020.05.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Bacterial contamination of intravitreal needles by the ocular surface microbiome.

Ozkan J(1), Coroneo M(2), Sandbach J(2), Subedi D(3), Willcox M(3), Thomas T(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia; School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of 
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. Electronic address: j.ozkan@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Prince of Wales Hospital, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(3)School of Optometry and Vision Science, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia.
(4)School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

PURPOSE: The ocular surface microbiota are recognised as one of causative
microorganisms in post-procedural endophthalmitis but in many cases the vitreous 
tap is culture negative. This study investigated bacterial contamination of
intravitreal (IVT) needles using multiple approaches covering culturing, 16S rRNA
gene sequencing, fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) and scanning electron
microscopy (SEM).
METHODS: IVT needles were obtained immediately after injection from patients
undergoing treatment for predominantly age-related macular degeneration. Eighteen
needles were analysed by culturing on chocolate blood agar. In addition, 40
needles were analysed by extracting DNA and paired-end sequencing of the 16S rRNA
gene. Sequences were quality filtered (USEARCH), taxonomically classified (SILVA)
and contaminant filtered (DECONTAM). Nine needles were analysed by either FISH
using the bacterial probe EUB338 or SEM.
RESULTS: Using culturing, three bacteria were identified from 5 of 18 needles
(28%) - Kocuria kristinae, Staphylococcus hominis and Sphingomonas paucimobilis. 
The negative control needles showed no growth. Following rigorous data filtering,
bacterial community analysis using 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed the presence
of predominantly Corynebacterium but also Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter,
Sphingomonas, Staphylococcus and Bacillus on the needles. Cocci-shaped cells in a
tetrad formation were observed using FISH, while SEM images showed cocci-shaped
bacteria in pairs and irregular tetrads.
CONCLUSIONS: The study showed evidence for a large diversity of bacteria on IVT
needles and visually confirmed their adherence. The diversity was similar to that
found on the ocular surface and in conjunctival tissue. This suggests the risk of
exogenous endophthalmitis remains even with sterilization of the conjunctival
surface.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtos.2020.05.010 
PMID: 32497656 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

