
1. Animals (Basel). 2020 Aug 4;10(8). pii: E1350. doi: 10.3390/ani10081350.

Changes in the Physicochemical Parameters of Yoghurts with Added Whey Protein in 
Relation to the Starter Bacteria Strains and Storage Time.

Brodziak A(1), Król J(1), Barłowska J(1), Teter A(1), Florek M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Quality Assessment and Processing of Animal Products, University 
of Life Sciences in Lublin, Akademicka 13, 20-950 Lublin, Poland.

The stability of the physicochemical characteristics of yoghurts during
refrigerated storage is important for industry and the consumer. In this study we
produced plain yoghurts with the addition of health-promoting whey protein
concentrate (WPC), using two different starter cultures based on Streptococcus
thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus. Physicochemical
changes (acidity, nutritional value, water activity, water-holding capacity,
texture, and colour, including whitening and yellowing indices) as well as
sensory changes occurring during 28-day refrigerated storage were determined.
Starter cultures were found to significantly (p ≤ 0.05 and p ≤ 0.01) influence
the water-holding capacity, firmness, consistency, cohesive strength and colour
parameters of the curd. Use of whey protein concentrate affected both the
physicochemical and sensory quality of the yoghurts. The additive had a
significant effect on potential acidity, inhibiting the increase in lactic acid
in the yoghurts during storage, and also reduced syneresis. However, it decreased
the lightness of curd and negatively affected its sensory characteristics,
primarily flavour. Moreover, nearly all parameters changed significantly with the
passage of storage time (in most cases negatively). The exceptions were total
protein and fat content. The changes, however, were not severe and remained at a 
level acceptable to tasters. Addition of 1% or 2% whey protein to yoghurt may be 
a good solution that can be routinely applied in the dairy industry to offer
consumers a new functional product. A comprehensive assessment of the
physicochemical and sensory changes occurring during refrigerated storage of
yoghurts manufactured with the addition of WPC and using different cultures is
crucial for modelling such a product.

DOI: 10.3390/ani10081350 
PMCID: PMC7460345
PMID: 32759770 

