
1. Physiol Rep. 2020 Aug;8(15):e14523. doi: 10.14814/phy2.14523.

Age- and duration-dependent effects of whey protein on high-fat diet-induced
changes in body weight, lipid metabolism, and gut microbiota in mice.

Boscaini S(1)(2)(3), Cabrera-Rubio R(1)(2), Nychyk O(1), Roger Speakman J(4)(5), 
Francis Cryan J(2)(3), David Cotter P(1)(2), Nilaweera KN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food Biosciences Department, Teagasc Food Research Centre, Moorepark, Fermoy, 
Ireland.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork,
Ireland.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics
and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, Scotland.

Bovine whey protein has been demonstrated to exert a positive effect on energy
balance, lipid metabolism, and nutrient absorption. Additionally, it affects gut 
microbiota configuration. Thus, whey protein is considered as good dietary
candidate to prevent or ameliorate metabolic diseases, such as obesity. However, 
the relationship that links energy balance, metabolism, and intestinal microbial 
population mediated by whey protein intake remains poorly understood. In this
study, we investigated the beneficial effects attributed to whey protein in the
context of high-fat diet (HFD) in mice at two different ages, with short or
longer durations of whey protein supplementation. Here, a 5-week dietary
intervention with HFD in combination with either whey protein isolate (WPI) or
the control nonwhey milk protein casein (CAS) was performed using 5-week or
10-week-old C57BL/6J mice. Notably, the younger mice had no prior history of
ingestion of WPI, while older mice did. 5-week-old HFD-WPI-fed mice showed a
decrease in weight gain and changes in the expression of genes within the
epidydimal white adipose tissue including those encoding leptin, inflammatory
marker CD68, fasting-induced adipose factor FIAF and enzymes involved in fatty
acids catabolism, relative to HFD-CAS-fed mice. Differences in β-diversity and
higher proportions of Lactobacillus murinus, and related functions, were evident 
within the gut microbiota of HFD-WPI mice. However, none of these changes were
observed in mice that started the HFD dietary intervention at 10-weeks-old, with 
an extended period of WPI supplementation. These results suggest that the effect 
of whey protein on mouse body weight, adipose tissue, and intestinal parameters
depends on diet duration and stage of life during which the diet is provided. In 
some instances, WPI influences gut microbiota composition and functional
potential, which might orchestrate observed metabolic and physiological
modifications.

© 2020 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on
behalf of The Physiological Society and the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.14814/phy2.14523 
PMCID: PMC7399378
PMID: 32748559 

