
1. Exp Dermatol. 2019 Nov;28(11):1289-1297. doi: 10.1111/exd.14028. Epub 2019 Sep
16.

Shifts in the skin microbiome associated with diaper dermatitis and emollient
treatment amongst infants and toddlers in China.

Zheng Y(1), Wang Q(1), Ma L(2), Chen Y(2), Gao Y(3), Zhang G(3), Cui S(1), Liang 
H(1), Song L(1), He C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Lab of Plant Resources Research and Development, Beijing
Technology and Business University, Beijing, China.
(2)Shanghai Jahwa Corporation, Shanghai, China.
(3)Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The microbiological basis of diaper dermatitis has not been clearly
elucidated; however, a better understanding of microbial colonization may be
vital for developing appropriate therapies.
METHODS: Using 16S-rRNA gene sequencing technology, we characterized and compared
the bacterial communities obtained from the buttock skin sites of children with
diaper dermatitis and from healthy controls. Bacterial diversity in the buttock
lesion area and subsequent recovery after emollient treatment have been discussed
herein.
RESULTS: In buttock skin of children with or without diaper dermatitis,
Staphylococcus and Anaerococcus were predominant in the total skin microbiome.
Compared with the healthy group, the overall skin bacterial richness and
diversity were higher in children with diaper dermatitis, with the abundance of
Proteobacteria being significantly higher. In the diaper dermatitis group, the
richness of Enterococcus, Erwinia and Pseudomonas was significantly higher, and
the levels of Clostridium and Actinomyces were significantly lower than those in 
healthy children. Richness of Staphylococcus aureus was significantly higher in
the diaper dermatitis group, whereas that of Staphylococcus epidermidis and
Bifidobacterium longum was lower. Staphylococcus epidermidis and Staphylococcus
haemolyticus, the dominant species found in buttock skin, were observed to
recover earlier after the disease had improved through emollient treatment.
CONCLUSION: Staphylococcus epidermidis, as skin probiotic bacterium, and
B longum, Clostridium butyricum and Lactobacillus ruminis, which are intestinal
probiotic bacteria, are significantly decreased in diaper dermatitis lesions.
These changes in the buttock skin microflora indicate an imbalance in the
microflora and suggest that the intestinal microflora may be undergoing dynamic
changes. The results of this study suggest that probiotic bacterial
supplementation may be useful in the treatment and prevention of diaper
dermatitis.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14028 
PMID: 31472099 

