
1. Adv Immunol. 2020;146:29-56. doi: 10.1016/bs.ai.2020.02.002. Epub 2020 Mar 19.

Friend or foe? Lactobacillus in the context of autoimmune disease.

Fine RL(1), Mubiru DL(2), Kriegel MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United
States; Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, CT, United States.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United
States; Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, United States.
(3)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United
States. Electronic address: martin.kriegel@yale.edu.

Over the last decade, the interplay between the gut microbiota, the consortium of
intestinal microbes that colonizes intestinal mucosal barriers, and its host
immune system has been increasingly better understood. Disruption of the delicate
balance between beneficial and pathogenic commensals, known as dysbiosis,
contributes to a variety of chronic immunologic and metabolic diseases.
Complicating this paradigm are bacterial strains that can operate paradoxically
both as instigators and attenuators of inflammatory responses, depending on host 
background. Here, we review the role of several strains in the genus
Lactobacillus within the context of autoimmune and other chronic disorders with a
predominant focus on L. reuteri. While strains within this species have been
shown to provide immune health benefits, they have also been demonstrated to act 
as a pathobiont in autoimmune-prone hosts. Beneficial functions in healthy hosts 
include competing with pathogenic microbes, promoting regulatory T cell
development, and protecting the integrity of the gut barrier. On the other hand, 
certain strains can also break through a dysfunctional gut barrier, colonize
internal tissues such as the spleen or liver and promote inflammatory responses
in host tissues that lead to autoimmune disease. This review summarizes the
manifold roles that these commensals play in the context of health and disease.

© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ai.2020.02.002 
PMID: 32327152 

