
1. J Food Biochem. 2020 Oct 1:e13491. doi: 10.1111/jfbc.13491. [Epub ahead of print]

Anti-obesity effect of Lactobacillus plantarum CQPC01 by modulating lipid
metabolism in high-fat diet-induced C57BL/6 mice.

Gan Y(1)(2)(3), Tang MW(4), Tan F(5), Zhou XR(1)(2)(3), Fan L(1)(2)(3), Xie
YX(1)(2)(3), Zhao X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Collaborative Innovation Center for Functional Food, Chongqing
University of Education, Chongqing, China.
(2)Chongqing Engineering Research Center of Functional Food, Chongqing University
of Education, Chongqing, China.
(3)Chongqing Engineering Laboratory for Research and Development of Functional
Food, Chongqing University of Education, Chongqing, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(5)Department of Public Health, Our Lady of Fatima University, Valenzuela,
Philippines.

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are an important group of microorganisms in the food
industry. LAB with health benefits are considered natural elements promoting
consumer health. The study investigated the anti-obesity effects of Lactobacillus
plantarum CQPC01 (LP-CQPC01) on high-fat diet-induced mice. Liver morphology,
liver function indexes, lipid indexes, and inflammatory factors in the serum and 
liver were determined. Expressions of lipid metabolism-related gene were also
detected by qPCR. LP-CQPC01 slowed the HFD-induced increase in body weight,
decreased the organ indexes, alleviated hepatic lipid accumulation, and inhibited
the increased adipose cell volume. LP-CQPC01 decreased lipid levels of serum and 
liver, and the contents of pro-inflammatory factors, and increased the IL-4 and
IL-10 contents. LP-CQPC01 downregulated the expressions of the C/EBP-α and PPARγ 
mRNA and upregulated CYP7A1, CPT1, LPL, CAT, SOD1, and SOD2 mRNA. Our results
indicated that LP-CQPC01 is a potential probiotic for preventing or alleviating
high-energy intake-related lipid conditions. PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS: Obesity is a
factor of a variety of cardiovascular diseases. Therefore, it is necessary to
suppress the occurrence of fat accumulation in time. This study investigated the 
effect of LP-CQPC01 on lipid regulation in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD) and
clarified the mechanism of strain to alleviate obesity by enhancing the
decomposition of cholesterol and detoxification of fat. LP-CQPC01 reduced fat
accumulation without oxidative damage, and was confirmed by the attenuated
pathological changes of liver. This research can serve as a significant reference
for future research, prevention, and treatment of high-energy intake-related
lipid conditions, and the development of functional foods with anti-obesity
activity.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/jfbc.13491 
PMID: 33006202 

