
1. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2020 Jun;71(3). doi: 10.26402/jpp.2020.3.03. Epub 2020 Sep
26.

Participation of the intestinal microbiota in the mechanism of beneficial effect 
of treatment with synbiotic Syngut on experimental colitis under stress
conditions.

Konturek PC(1), Konturek K(2), Brzozowski T(3), Wojcik D(3), Magierowski M(3),
Targosz A(3), Krzysiek-Maczka G(3), Sliwowski Z(3), Strzalka M(3), Magierowska
K(3), Szczyrk U(3), Kwiecien S(3), Ptak-Belowska A(3), Neurath M(4), Dieterich
W(5), Wirtz S(5), Zopf Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Thuringia Clinic Saalfeld, Teaching Hospital 
of the University of Jena, Germany. pkonturek@web.de.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University Augsburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, Cracow, Poland.
(4)Department of Medicine 1, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nurnberg
(FAU), Germany.
(5)Department of Medicine 1, Hector-Center for Nutrition, Exercise and Sports,
Erlangen-Nurnberg (FAU), Germany.

Gut-brain axis plays a central role in the regulation of stress related diseases 
such as irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). It is
increasingly recognized that stress modulates gut microbiota community structure 
and activity and represents an important causal factor in dysbiosis. This study
was designed to determine the effect of daily treatment with synbiotic (Syngut)
containing inulin, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium lactis W51,
Lactobacillus plantarum W21 and Lactococcus lactis applied i.g. at a dose of 50
mg/kg i.g. on the colonic damage and colonic mucosal blood flow in rats with
experimentally induced TNBS-colitis that were additionally exposed or not to
acute stress (episodes of cold restraint stress every other day before colitis
induction). Control rats received daily treatment with vehicle (saline, i.g.) or 
mesalazine (50 mg/kg-d i.g.), the standard drug recommended in therapy of IBD. At
the termination of TNBS colitis, the histologic evaluation of colonic mucosa,
mucosal malonyldialdehyde (MDA) level and plasma concentrations of
proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β) and adipokine adiponectin were assessed.
the samples of colonic mucosa not involving colonic lesions and surrounding the
flared mucosa were excised for the determination of mRNA expression for
proinflammatory biomarkers TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-10 and COX-2 as well as antioxidazing
factors SOD-1 and SOD-2. Finally, the gut microbial profiles were analyzed by 16S
rRNA sequencing at phylum, family and genus level. Episodes of cold stress
significantly aggravated the course of TNBS colitis, and significantly increased 
the release of proinflammatory cytokines as well as the significant increase in
the MDA concentration has been observed as compared with non-stressed TNBS rats. 
These changes were followed by the significant fall in the CBF and plasma
adiponectin levels and by the overexpression of mRNA of proinflammatory
biomarkers. Synbiotic treatment with Syngut significantly reduced the area of
colonic lesions observed macroscopically and microscopically in rats with TNBS
colitis with or without exposure to cold stress, significantly increased the CBF,
normalized plasma adiponectin levels and significantly attenuated the release and
colonic expression of proinflammatory cytokines and biomarkers. the analysis of
the gut microbiota showed a significant reduction of microbial diversity (Shannon
index) in rats with TNBS colitis with or without exposure to stress. The therapy 
with Syngut failed to significantly affect the alpha diversity. At the phylum
level, the significant rise in Proteobacteria has been observed in stressed rats 
with TNBS colitis and this effects was attenuated by treatment with Syngut. At
family level, TNBS colitis alone or in combination with stress led to a
significant decrease of SCFA producing bacterial taxa such as Ruminococaceae and 
Lachnospiraceae and Syngut counteracted this effect. We conclude that: 1) cold
stress exacerbates the gastrointestinal inflammation in experimental colitis; 2) 
the synbiotic therapy with Syngut ameliorates the gut inflammation in rats with
TNBS colitis combined with cold stress; 3) the beneficial effect of Syngut is
accompanied by increase of anti-inflammatory taxa such as Ruminococaceae and
Lachnospiraceae, and 4) the modulation of gut microbiota with Syngut alleviates
stress-related intestinal inflammation suggesting a potential usefulness of
synbiotic therapy in intestinal disorders accompanied by stress in patients with 
IBD.

DOI: 10.26402/jpp.2020.3.03 
PMID: 32991312 

