
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Sep 5. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10785. [Epub ahead of print]

Metagenomic analysis of microbial community succession during the pickling
process of Zhacai (preserved mustard tuber) and its correlation with Zhacai
biochemical indices.

Yang J(1), Li F(1), Zhang Y(2), He Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science Southwest University, Tiansheng Road No.2, Beibei,
Chongqing, 400716, P. R. China.
(2)Chongqing Fuling Zhacai Group Co. LTD. Er Du Village First Group, Jiangbei
Street, Fuling District Chongqing, 408000, China.

BACKGROUND: Industrial Fuling Zhacai is pickled by a method summarized as "three 
times pickled and pressed", in which raw mustard tubers are subjected to three
stages of pickling in different salt concentrations, with a pressing operation at
the end of each stage to remove brine. This study used Illumina MiSeq technology 
and multivariate statistical analyses to investigate microbial community
succession during the pickling process and its correlation with Zhacai
biochemical indices.
RESULTS: A total of 19 phyla, 208 genera and 295 species of bacteria were
identified. Lactobacillus was the dominant genus of bacteria in all three stages 
and Lactobacillus sakei was the dominant species in the first and second stages. 
A total of 6 phyla, 200 genera and 301 species of fungi were also identified.
According to PICRUSt2 prediction, the main functions of the bacterial and fungal 
communities were carbohydrate and protein metabolism, while alcohol metabolism
was also a function of fungi. Nine bacterial genera closely correlated with
Zhacai biochemical indices: Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, Pedobacter, Erwinia,
Lactobacillus, Chryseobacterium, Flavobacterium, Duganella and Paenarthrobacter; 
while six genera of fungi correlated closely: Penicillium, Cystobasidium,
Cladosporium, Plenodomus, Aspergillus and Simplicillium. All these genera
probably originated from the surface microorganisms of raw mustard tuber.
CONCLUSION: This study reveals the succession patterns of microbial community
structures during the pickling process of industrial Zhacai and infers the core
functional flora, providing reference data for Zhacai pickling process control.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10785 
PMID: 32888329 

