
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Aug 4. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09689-w.
[Epub ahead of print]

Potentially Probiotic Lactobacillus Strains Derived from Food Intensify
Crystallization Caused by Proteus mirabilis in Urine.

Torzewska A(1), Wiewiura P(2), Brodecka D(2), Szczerbiec D(2), Różalski A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology of Bacteria, Faculty of Biology and Environmental
Protection, University of Lodz, Banacha 12/16, 90-237, Lodz, Poland.
agnieszka.torzewska@biol.uni.lodz.pl.
(2)Department of Biology of Bacteria, Faculty of Biology and Environmental
Protection, University of Lodz, Banacha 12/16, 90-237, Lodz, Poland.

Proteus mirabilis is a common cause of infectious urolithiasis. The first stage
in the formation of urinary stones is the crystallization of mineral salts in the
urine induced by urease activity of this microorganism. Lactobacillus spp. are an
important component of the human microbiota and in large quantities occur in
foods. Regardless of their origin, those with probiotic properties are proposed
as an alternative to antibiotic therapy in the treatment of urinary tract
infections. The aim of the study was to check the effect of selected
Lactobacillus plantarum and Lactobacillus brevis strains on crystallization
caused by P. mirabilis in an in vitro experiment. It has been confirmed that
selected Lactobacillus strains have antibacterial properties and colonize the
urinary tract epithelium. During 24-h incubation of bacterial cultures,
containing P. mirabilis and individual Lactobacillus strains, in synthetic urine,
bacterial viability (CFU/mL), pH, and crystallization were determined.
Crystallization was assessed quantitatively and qualitatively using AAS and XRD
techniques as well as phase-contrast microscopy. It has been shown that in the
presence of selected Lactobacillus strains, the culture pH increases faster,
especially after 8 h of incubation, compared with the pure P. mirabilis culture. 
An increase in pH reduces the viability of P. mirabilis; however, in the presence
of some lactobacilli, the uropathogen grows more intensively. The presence of
Lactobacillus also affected crystallization by increasing its intensity, and the 
resulting crystals were larger in size. Tested L. plantarum and L. brevis strains
could therefore accelerate the formation of urinary stones and development of
infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09689-w 
PMID: 32754854 

