
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Sep 30;9(10). pii: E661. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9100661.

Caerin 1 Antimicrobial Peptides That Inhibit HIV and Neisseria May Spare
Protective Lactobacilli.

Rollins-Smith LA(1), Smith PB(1), Ledeczi AM(1), Rowe JM(1), Reinert LK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology and of Pediatrics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine and Department of Biological Sciences,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Although acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a manageable disease for many, it is still a
source of significant morbidity and economic hardship for many others. The
predominant mode of transmission of HIV/AIDS is sexual intercourse, and measures 
to reduce transmission are needed. Previously, we showed that caerin 1
antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) originally derived from Australian amphibians
inhibited in vitro transmission of HIV at relatively low concentrations and had
low toxicity for T cells and an endocervical cell line. The use of AMPs as part
of microbicidal formulations would expose the vaginal microbiome to these agents 
and cause potential harm to protective lactobacilli. Here, we tested the effects 
of caerin 1 peptides and their analogs on the viability of two species of common 
vaginal lactobacilli (Lactobacillus rhamnosus and Lactobacillus crispatus).
Several candidate peptides had limited toxicity for the lactobacilli at a range
of concentrations that would inhibit HIV. Three AMPs were also tested for their
ability to inhibit growth of Neisseria lactamica, a close relative of the
sexually transmissible Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Neisseria lactamica was
significantly more sensitive to the AMPs than the lactobacilli. Thus, several
candidate AMPs have the capacity to inhibit HIV and possible N. gonorrhoeae
transmission at concentrations that are significantly less harmful to the
resident lactobacilli.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9100661 
PMID: 33008028 

