
1. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2020 Apr;70(4):2782-2858. doi: 10.1099/ijsem.0.004107.
Epub 2020 Apr 15.

A taxonomic note on the genus Lactobacillus: Description of 23 novel genera,
emended description of the genus Lactobacillus Beijerinck 1901, and union of
Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae.

Zheng J(1), Wittouck S(2), Salvetti E(3), Franz CMAP(4), Harris HMB(5),
Mattarelli P(6), O'Toole PW(5), Pot B(7), Vandamme P(8), Walter J(9)(10),
Watanabe K(11)(12), Wuyts S(2), Felis GE(3), Gänzle MG(13)(10), Lebeer S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Huazhong Agricultural University, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, Hubei Key Laboratory of Agricultural Bioinformatics, Wuhan, Hubei, 
PR China.
(2)Research Group Environmental Ecology and Applied Microbiology, Department of
Bioscience Engineering, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Dept. of Biotechnology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(4)Max Rubner-Institut, Department of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Kiel,
Germany.
(5)School of Microbiology & APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Co. 
Cork, Ireland.
(6)University of Bologna, Dept. of Agricultural and Food Sciences, Bologna,
Italy.
(7)Research Group of Industrial Microbiology and Food Biotechnology (IMDO), Vrije
Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(8)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(10)Department of Agricultural, Food & Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(11)Food Industry Research and Development Institute, Bioresource Collection and 
Research Center, Hsinchu, Taiwan, ROC.
(12)National Taiwan University, Dept. of Animal Science and Technology, Taipei,
Taiwan, ROC.
(13)Hubei University of Technology, College of Bioengineering and Food Science,
Wuhan, Hubei, PR China.

The genus Lactobacillus comprises 261 species (at March 2020) that are extremely 
diverse at phenotypic, ecological and genotypic levels. This study evaluated the 
taxonomy of Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae on the basis of whole genome
sequences. Parameters that were evaluated included core genome phylogeny,
(conserved) pairwise average amino acid identity, clade-specific signature genes,
physiological criteria and the ecology of the organisms. Based on this polyphasic
approach, we propose reclassification of the genus Lactobacillus into 25 genera
including the emended genus Lactobacillus, which includes host-adapted organisms 
that have been referred to as the Lactobacillus delbrueckii group,
Paralactobacillus and 23 novel genera for which the names Holzapfelia,
Amylolactobacillus, Bombilactobacillus, Companilactobacillus,
Lapidilactobacillus, Agrilactobacillus, Schleiferilactobacillus,
Loigolactobacilus, Lacticaseibacillus, Latilactobacillus, Dellaglioa,
Liquorilactobacillus, Ligilactobacillus, Lactiplantibacillus,
Furfurilactobacillus, Paucilactobacillus, Limosilactobacillus,
Fructilactobacillus, Acetilactobacillus, Apilactobacillus, Levilactobacillus,
Secundilactobacillus and Lentilactobacillus are proposed. We also propose to
emend the description of the family Lactobacillaceae to include all genera that
were previously included in families Lactobacillaceae and Leuconostocaceae. The
generic term 'lactobacilli' will remain useful to designate all organisms that
were classified as Lactobacillaceae until 2020. This reclassification reflects
the phylogenetic position of the micro-organisms, and groups lactobacilli into
robust clades with shared ecological and metabolic properties, as exemplified for
the emended genus Lactobacillus encompassing species adapted to vertebrates (such
as Lactobacillus delbrueckii, Lactobacillus iners, Lactobacillus crispatus,
Lactobacillus jensensii, Lactobacillus johnsonii and Lactobacillus acidophilus)
or invertebrates (such as Lactobacillus apis and Lactobacillus bombicola).

DOI: 10.1099/ijsem.0.004107 
PMID: 32293557  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

