
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Sep 2. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09705-z.
[Epub ahead of print]

Impact of Potential Probiotic Lactobacillus Strains on Host Growth and
Development in a Drosophila melanogaster Model.

Laomongkholchaisri P(1)(2), Teanpaisan R(2)(3), Wonglapsuwan M(4), Piwat S(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Prince of Songkla
University, Hat-Yai, Thailand.
(2)Common Oral Diseases and Epidemiology Research Center, Faculty of Dentistry,
Prince of Songkla University, Hat-Yai, Thailand.
(3)Department of Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Prince of Songkla University,
Hat-Yai, Thailand.
(4)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Faculty of Science, 
Prince of Songkla University, Hat-Yai, Thailand.
(5)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Prince of Songkla
University, Hat-Yai, Thailand. supacharin@hotmail.com.
(6)Common Oral Diseases and Epidemiology Research Center, Faculty of Dentistry,
Prince of Songkla University, Hat-Yai, Thailand. supacharin@hotmail.com.

Lactobacillus paracasei SD1, Lactobacillus rhamnosus SD11, and Lactobacillus
gasseri SD12 were proposed as potential probiotics for oral health. However, the 
effects of them on host physiology are still unknown. This study aimed to select 
strains that can promote host growth and development in monocolonized Drosophila 
model compared with axenic and the commercial Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG-treated 
flies. The morphogenesis and growth of axenic Drosophila melanogaster were
assessed from embryo to adult stage when provided with each probiotic
strain-supplemented food. The colonization and persistence of probiotic in fly
gut were also evaluated. The results indicated that axenic condition caused the
lowest adult weight and emergence rate. All probiotic groups had higher weight
than axenic group. Lact. rhamnosus SD11 group presented high adult emergence rate
equivalent to Lact. rhamnosus GG group, which is significantly higher than the
others. However, Lact. gasseri SD12 group had significantly lower adult weight
and emergence rate when compared with Lact. rhamnosus GG group. The gut
probiotics levels were rapidly increased within the first day after receiving
probiotics. After probiotic cessation, their number in gut decreased and was
maintained at low level, except for Lact. gasseri SD12, which completely vanished
since day one. In conclusion, Lact. paracasei SD1, Lact. rhamnosus SD11, and
Lact. rhamnosus GG can affect morphogenesis and weight of flies when fed since
immature stage and have short period gut colonization. The findings of this study
could possibly imply comparable health-promoting effects between Lact. paracasei 
SD1 and Lact. rhamnosus SD11 to commercial strain in Drosophila model.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09705-z 
PMID: 32875521 

