
1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Sep 30;13(19). pii: E4347. doi: 10.3390/ma13194347.

Zinc Oxide Nanocomposites-Extracellular Synthesis, Physicochemical
Characterization and Antibacterial Potential.

Pomastowski P(1), Król-Górniak A(1)(2), Railean-Plugaru V(1)(2), Buszewski
B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Modern Interdisciplinary Technologies, Nicolaus Copernicus
University in Torun, 4 Wileńska Str., 87-100 Torun, Poland.
(2)Department of Environmental Chemistry and Bioanalytics, Faculty of Chemistry, 
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Torun, 7 Gagarina Str., 87-100 Torun, Poland.

This research presents, for the first time, the potential of the Lactobacillus
paracasei LC20 isolated from sweet whey as a novel, effective and accessible
source for post-cultured ZnO nanocomposites synthesis. The obtained
nanocomposites were subjected to comprehensive characterization by a broad
spectrum of instrumental techniques. Results of spectroscopic and microscopic
analysis confirmed the hexagonal crystalline structure of ZnO in the nanometer
size. The dispersion stability of the obtained nanocomposites was determined
based on the zeta potential (ZP) measurements-the average ZP value was found to
be -29.15 ± 1.05 mV in the 7-9 pH range. The ZnO nanocomposites (NCs)
demonstrated thermal stability up to 130 °C based on the results of
thermogravimetric TGA/DTG) analysis. The organic deposit on the nanoparticle
surface was recorded by spectroscopic analysis in the infrared range (FT-IR).
Results of the spectrometric study exhibited nanostructure-assisted laser
desorption/ionization effects and also pointed out the presence of organic
deposits and, what is more, allowed us to identify the specific amino acids and
peptides present on the ZnO NCs surfaces. In this context, mass spectrometry (MS)
data confirmed the nano-ZnO formation mechanism. Moreover, fluorescence data
showed an increase in fluorescence signal in the presence of nanocomposites
designed for potential use as, e.g., biosensors. Despite ZnO NCs' luminescent
properties, they can also act as promising antiseptic agents against clinically
relevant pathogens. Therefore, a pilot study on the antibacterial activity of
biologically synthesized ZnO NCs was carried out against four strains
(Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa) by using MIC (minimal inhibitory concentration). Additionally, the
colony forming units (CFU) assay was performed and quantified for all bacterial
cells as the percentage of viable cells in comparison to a control sample
(untreated culture) The nanocomposites were effective among three pathogens with 
MIC values in the range of 86.25-172.5 μg/mL and showed potential as a new type
of, e.g., medical path or ointment formulation.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13194347 
PMID: 33007802 

