
1. J Lab Physicians. 2020 Aug;12(2):111-114. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1716604. Epub 2020 
Sep 2.

Identification and Sensitivity of Vaginal and Probiotic Lactobacillus species to 
Urinary Antibiotics.

Singhal L(1), Gupta V(1), Gupta M(1), Goel P(2), Chander J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Government Medical College and Hospital,
Chandigarh, India.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Government Medical College and
Hospital, Chandigarh, India.

Objectives 窶ォealthy vaginal microbiota is mainly dominated by Lactobacillus
species namely L. crispatus , L. gasseri , L. jensenii , and L. iners .
Lactobacilli are thought to play an important role in the prevention of
urogenital infections, and Lactobacillus probiotics to restore and/or maintain
vaginal health has been advocated. These can interfere with the adherence,
growth, and colonization by uropathogenic bacteria, thus reducing the risk of
urinary tract infection (UTI). This study aims to isolate and evaluate the
susceptibility of healthy vaginal and probiotic Lactobacillus spp. to urinary
antibiotics. Materials and methods 窶ア total of 50 premenopausal, nonmenstruating 
women with no symptoms of vaginal infection or UTI or antimicrobial use in the
past 2 weeks were enrolled. Two high vaginal swabs were collected for Nugent's
scoring and anaerobic culture. Colonies yielding gram-positive rods were
confirmed by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Lactobacillus strains in a vaginal probiotic tablet 
were also isolated, and the sensitivity of both sets to urinary antibiotics was
determined. Results 窶ア total of 29 Lactobacillus spp. were isolated, including L.
crispatus (15), L. gasseri (5), L. vaginalis (4), L. paracasei (2), L. curvatus
(1), L. fermentum (1), and L. paraplantarum (1). All strains were susceptible to 
nitrofurantoin and resistant to norfloxacin, gentamicin, and cotrimoxazole
(except L. paracasei ). The probiotic strains were pan-sensitive. Conclusions
窶ケrophylactic antibiotics are capable of eliminating the normal vaginal
inhabitants, which may increase the probability of UTI. The administration of
vaginal probiotics as an alternate or multidrug therapy can restore vaginal
microbiota and help prevent recurrent UTI.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1716604 
PMCID: PMC7467827
PMID: 32905311 

Conflict of interest statement: Ethical ApprovalPresentation at a MeetingConflict
of Interest All procedures performed in this study were in accordance with the
ethical standards of the institutional and/or national research committee and
with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical
standards. North-West Chapter of the Indian Association of Medical
Microbiologists, Rohtak, Haryana, India. Dr. Chander reports grants from the
Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, during the conduct of 
the study. Dr. V. Gupta reports grants from the Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India, during the conduct of the study. Dr. Goel
reports grants from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of
India, during the conduct of the study. Dr. Singhal reports grants from the
Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, during the conduct of 
the study. Dr. M. Gupta reports grants from the Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India, during the conduct of the study.

