
1. Cureus. 2020 Jul 29;12(7):e9462. doi: 10.7759/cureus.9462.

Urinary Tract Infection Caused by the Novel Pathogen, Lactococcus Garvieae: A
Case Report.

Tariq EF(1)(2), Irshad Y(3), Khalil HB(4), Khakwani AS(5), Khan UA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Nishtar Medical University/Hospital, Multan, PAK.
(2)Nephrology, Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, Kulsoom International Hospital, Islamabad, PAK.
(4)Internal Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma
City, USA.
(5)Internal Medicine, Suburban Community Hospital, East Norriton, USA.
(6)Internal Medicine and Nephrology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, USA.

Lactococcus garvieae is a part of the genus Lactococcus which was previously a
part of the genus Streptococcus. It has been associated with serious diseases in 
aquaculture. However, human infections are rare. The most common presentation in 
humans is infective endocarditis. Urinary tract infection (UTI) is a unique
presentation of this pathogen. We report the case of a 70-year-old male with a
past history of benign prostatic hyperplasia who presented with confusion.
Urinalysis confirmed the growth of L. garvieae. A seven-day treatment course of
amoxicillin-clavulanate successfully treated the patient. The risk factors for
acquiring the L. garvieae infections include contact with seafood or aquaculture.
Other risk factors include immunosuppression, gastric acid suppression, and
anatomical or physiological defect in the gastrointestinal tract. Special tests, 
such as VITEK® 2, API® 32 strep system, 16S rRNA, or polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing, are needed for its diagnosis. Hence, we suggest underreporting of 
the infection may be possible. It is a novel cause of UTI, we suggest a high
index of suspicion should be kept, especially in people with associated risk
factors or exposure to seafood.

Copyright © 2020, Tariq et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.9462 
PMCID: PMC7455392
PMID: 32874793 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

