
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Aug 21;148:104271. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104271. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Antimicrobial and antiadhesive effects of Lactobacillus isolates of healthy human
gut origin on Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) and Enteroaggregative
Escherichia coli (EAEC).

Pazhoohan M(1), Sadeghi F(2), Moghadami M(3), Soltanmoradi H(3), Davoodabadi
A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran. Electronic address: m.ghouriani71@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran; Cellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Health
Research Institute, Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Babol University of Medical
Sciences, Babol, Iran.
(4)Infectious Diseases & Tropical Medicine Research Center, Babol University of
Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine,
Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran. Electronic address:
davoodabadi89@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Diarrhea is one of the five leading causes of mortality in children
under the age of five, especially in developing countries. Nowadays, by
increasing the resistance of pathogens to antibiotics, employment of probiotics
as novel therapeutic method, could be considered as a necessity.The aim of this
study was to examine the features and antagonistic action of Lactobacillus
strains, against the growth and adhesion of Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(ETEC) and Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAEC) strains creating diarrhea in
children. Then, we introduced new strains of Lactobacillus as probiotic
candidates, to prevent diarrheal infections in children.
METHODS: Stool samples were collected from healthy individuals, and Lactobacillus
strains were isolated. The antimicrobial effect of the isolates against ETEC and 
EAEC strains investigated by agar well diffusion method and their resistance to
acidic and bile conditions. The potency of selected isolates in adhesion to HT-29
epithelial cells and their ability to inhibit the adhesion of ETEC and EAEC
strains to this cell were measured. At the end, identification of the optimally
efficient Lactobacillus isolates was performed by 16S rDNA sequencing and making 
Phylogenetic tree using MEGA (version 4.0) software.
RESULTS: In total, 157 isolates suspected to Lactobacillus were isolated from 115
stool samples. In antimicrobial activity test, ETEC and EAEC growth was inhibited
by 132 and 84 isolates respectively, while 17 isolates showed resistance to Bile.
Of 17 Bile resistant Lactobacillus isolates, 15 isolates were resistant to pH:
3.2. Further, among 15 isolates, only two isolates, were resistant to pH: 2.5. In
the adhesion assay, five isolates had more adhesion tendency to HT-29 epithelial 
cells than L. rhamnosus GG, which was considered as a positive control.
Investigation of isolates that inhibit adhesion of ETEC and EAEC strains to
HT-29 cells showed that four isolates were able to inhibit ETEC adhesion.
However, only one out of four isolates was relatively able to have an impact on
EAEC adhesion.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, three species of Lactobacillus including L. paracasei 
(two strain), L. fermentum (two strain) and L. plantarum showed good probiotic
properties compared to other isolates that were identified by sequencing. In this
study, strain L. fermentum 61.1 had the highest adhesion ability to HT-29 cells
and strain L. paracasei 47.2 had the highest potency to inhibit ETEC adhesion to 
HT-29 cells. These isolates have good probiotic properties and are likely to be
effective in preventing or treating diarrheal infections, especially in children.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104271 
PMID: 32835777 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that there is no conflict of interest.

