
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 Jul 20. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0218. [Epub ahead of
print]

Characterization of lsa(D), a Novel Gene Responsible for Resistance to
Lincosamides, Streptogramins A, and Pleuromutilins in Fish Pathogenic Lactococcus
garvieae Serotype II.

Shi YZ(1), Yoshida T(1), Fujiwara A(2), Nishiki I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture, University of Miyazaki, Miyazaki, Japan.
(2)Research Center for Bioinformatics and Biosciences, National Research
Institute of Fisheries Science, Fisheries Research and Education Agency,
Yokohama, Japan.

Aims: Fish pathogenic Lactococcus garvieae serotype II has been isolated from
cultured fish species in Japan. This study aimed to investigate the molecular
mechanisms of lincomycin (LCM)-resistant L. garvieae serotype II and assess the
molecular basis for lincosamides-streptogramins A-pleuromutilins (LSAP)-resistant
phenotype. Results: We identified a novel lsa(D)-encoded 497-aa ATP-binding
cassette F (ABC-F) protein in the LSAP-resistant strains. Amino acid identities
of 41.25-54.73% were obtained between the deduced amino acids from Lsa(D) and
other Lsa-type ABC-F proteins. Furthermore, comparative analysis revealed that
the allele of lsa(D) with single point mutation at 233 aa position (TGG → TAG;
tryptophan→premature termination codon [PTC]) in LSAP-sensitive strains. The
minimum inhibitory concentrations of antimicrobials against the lsa(D)
complementary strain and lsa(D)-disrupted mutant confirmed that lsa(D) conferred 
the LSAP-resistant phenotype. The reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
could not detect the noncoding region of lsa(D) allelic variant in the
LSAP-sensitive strains. Additionally, the PTC (TAG) in LCM-sensitive strains was 
replaced by TGG, CAG, or TAT in the laboratory-induced revertant mutants.
Conclusions: The novel lsa(D) conferred the LSAP-resistant phenotype in
clinically LCM-resistant L. garvieae serotype II strains. However, the allele of 
lsa(D) gene containing the PTC was found in L. garvieae serotype II, resulting in
the LSAP-susceptible phenotype.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0218 
PMID: 32706619 

