
1. Sex Transm Dis. 2020 Aug 24. doi: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000001272. [Epub ahead of
print]

Clinical and personal lubricants impact growth of vaginal Lactobacillus species
and colonization of vaginal epithelial cells: an in vitro study.

Łaniewski P(1), Owen KA(1)(2), Khnanisho M(1)(3), Brotman RM(4), Herbst-Kralovetz
MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine-Phoenix, University of Arizona, Phoenix, AZ.
(2)University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(3)Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD.

BACKGROUND: Vaginal lubricants are commonly used during gynecological exams,
sexual activities or to alleviate vaginal dryness. Many lubricants contain
potentially bacteriostatic or bactericidal agents (parabens, chlorhexidine
gluconate, nonoxynol-9). Our objective was to evaluate the impact of lubricants
that vary in formulation, on the growth and viability of vaginal Lactobacillus
species and vaginal epithelial cell (VEC) colonization in an in vitro model.
METHODS: Growth curve, disk diffusion and minimal inhibitory assays were used to 
determine impact of lubricants or excipients on the growth of L. crispatus, L.
gasseri, L. jensenii and L. iners. Two L. crispatus strains were utilized in VEC 
colonization assays. Statistical differences were determined by ANOVA.
RESULTS: Lubricants containing chlorhexidine gluconate or nonoxynol-9
(Conceptrol®, K-Y™ Jelly, and Surgilube®) significantly inhibited Lactobacillus
spp. growth (P<0.05). In contrast, other clinical lubricants (E-Z Lubricating
Jelly, McKesson Lubricating) and personal lubricants (Astroglide® Liquid, Good
Clean Love Almost Naked, K-Y™ Warming Jelly) did not exhibit this effect.
Chlorhexidine gluconate had a detrimental effect on Lactobacillus growth and
exhibited stronger antimicrobial activity compared to methylparaben and
propylparaben (P<0.0001). There were lubricants that did not induce cytotoxicity 
in VEC (Good Clean Love Almost Naked, E-Z Lubricating Jelly, McKesson Lubricating
Jelly), but these products did substantially decrease attachment of Lactobacillus
to VEC, particularly when VEC were pre-exposed to lubricants prior to inoculation
with bacteria (P<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: This in vitro model indicates that select vaginal lubricants,
particularly those with chlorhexidine gluconate, have potentially adverse effects
on women's health by reducing growth and re-colonization of vaginal Lactobacillus
species.

DOI: 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000001272 
PMID: 32842049 

