
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 May 11. doi: 10.1111/jam.14698. [Epub ahead of print]

Inoculation of exogenous lactic acid bacteria exerted a limited influence on the 
silage fermentation and bacterial community compositions of reed canary grass
straw on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.

Chen L(1), Cai Y(2), Li P(1), You M(1), Cheng Q(1), Lu Y(3), Gou W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sichuan Academy of Grassland Sciences, Chengdu, China.
(2)Japan International Research Center for Agricultural Science (JIRCAS),
Ibaraki, Japan.
(3)Southwest University for Minzu, Chengdu, China.

AIMS: This study evaluated the effects of exogenous lactic acid bacteria (LAB) on
silage fermentation and bacterial community of reed canary grass (RCG) straw.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The leaf, stem and whole crop of RCG straw were separately
ensiled in small bag silos, without (control) or with inoculation of two
exogenous LAB (LP, Lactobacillus plantarum; LB, Lactobacillus buchneri), and
stored at ambient temperature of <20°C. Inoculation of exogenous LAB decreased
(P < 0·05) bacterial alpha diversity and shifted (P < 0·05) bacterial community
compositions, but did not change (P> 0·05) the relative abundance of
Lactobacillus. Particularly, inoculation of LB increased (P < 0·05) acetic acid
and propionic acid contents, decreased (P < 0·05) butyric acid (BA) and ammonia-N
contents, separated (P < 0·05) the bacterial community in silage. However, the
exogenous LAB inoculated silages were characterized by main distribution of
yeasts, presence of undesirable bacterial genera such as Clostridium and high
levels of BA and ammonia-N.
CONCLUSION: Inoculation of exogenous LAB exerted a limited influence on the
silage fermentation and bacterial community compositions of RCG straw on the
Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Commercial LAB inoculants are not always
efficient on enhancing silage quality and stability. Thus, an alternative
additive for inhibiting undesirable microbes during storage is important to
improve RCG silage quality on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14698 
PMID: 32392369 

