
1. Cytokine. 2020 Sep 9;136:155269. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2020.155269. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Lactobacillus johnsonii-activated chicken bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
exhibit maturation and increased expression of cytokines and chemokines in vitro.

Huang X(1), Ma S(2), Wang L(3), Zhou H(3), Jiang Y(3), Cui W(3), Qiao X(3), Xu
Y(3), Li Y(4), Tang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, PR 
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, PR 
China; Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biological Engineering and Technology,
Ministry of Agriculture, Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Jiangsu Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, PR China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, PR 
China; Northeastern Science Inspection Station, China Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Animal Pathogen Biology, PR China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, PR 
China; Northeastern Science Inspection Station, China Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Animal Pathogen Biology, PR China. Electronic address:
yijingli@163.com.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, PR 
China; Northeastern Science Inspection Station, China Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Animal Pathogen Biology, PR China. Electronic address:
tanglijie@163.com.

Lactobacillus species are typical members of gut microflora that immunomodulatory
effects and can regulate a variety of immune cells, such as dendritic cells
(DCs). Notably, DCs possess the unique ability to initiate primary immune
responses. Notably, DCs possess the unique ability to initiate primary immune
responses. In this study, we investigated the effects of Lactobacillus johnsonii 
(L. johnsonii) on the maturation and activation of chicken bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells (chBM-DCs). The chBM-DCs generated from chicken bone marrow
monocytes were stimulated using lethally irradiated L. johnsonii. L.
johnsonii-stimulated chBM-DCs upregulated the expression of major
histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II), CD40, and CD86, decreased
phagocytosis, and increased the ability to induce the proliferation of allogeneic
T cells, which displayed a mature phenotype and function. Upon maturation with L.
johnsonii, the expression of Th1-type cytokines [interleukin (IL)-12,
interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)], a Th2-type cytokine
(IL-10), pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β and IL-6), and chemokines (CXCLi1 and 
CXCLi2) greatly increased; however, a high expression of IL-10 was only observed 
at mid-late time points for chBM-DCs stimulated with high doses of L. johnsonii. 
Moreover, L. johnsonii upregulated the mRNA levels of TLR2 and TLR5. These
results reveal that L. johnsonii plays a potentially important role in modulating
the immunological functions of chBM-DCs, suggesting that it influences and
mediates immune responses in vitro.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2020.155269 
PMID: 32919254 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

