
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 13;11:1805. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01805. eCollection 
2020.

Mutations Selected After Exposure to Bacteriocin Lcn972 Activate a Bce-Like
Bacitracin Resistance Module in Lactococcus lactis.

Campelo AB(1), López-González MJ(1)(2), Escobedo S(1)(2), Janzen T(3), Neves
AR(3), Rodríguez A(1)(2), Martínez B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)DairySafe group, Department of Technology and Biotechnology of Dairy Products,
Instituto de Productos Lácteos de Asturias (IPLA), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Villaviciosa, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (ISPA),
Oviedo, Spain.
(3)Chr. Hansen A/S, Hørsholm, Denmark.

Resistance against antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) is often mediated by
detoxification modules that rely on sensing the AMP through a BceAB-like
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter that subsequently activates a cognate
two-component system (TCS) to mount the cell response. Here, the Lactococcus
lactis ABC transporter YsaDCB is shown to constitute, together with TCS-G, a
detoxification module that protects L. lactis against bacitracin and the
bacteriocin Lcn972, both AMPs that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis. Initially,
increased expression of ysaDCB was detected by RT-qPCR in three L. lactis
resistant to Lcn972, two of which were also resistant to bacitracin. These
mutants shared, among others, single-point mutations in ysaB coding for the
putative Bce-like permease. These results led us to investigate the function of
YsaDCB ABC-transporter and study the impact of these mutations. Expression in
trans of ysaDCB in L. lactis NZ9000, a strain that lacks a functional
detoxification module, enhanced resistance to both AMPs, demonstrating its role
as a resistance factor in L. lactis. When the three different ysaB alleles from
the mutants were expressed, all of them outperformed the wild-type transporter in
resistance against Lcn972 but not against bacitracin, suggesting a distinct mode 
of protection against each AMP. Moreover, P ysaD promoter fusions, designed to
measure the activation of the detoxification module, revealed that the ysaB
mutations unlock transcriptional control by TCS-G, resulting in constitutive
expression of the ysaDCB operon. Finally, deletion of ysaD was also performed to 
get an insight into the function of this gene. ysaD encodes a secreted peptide
and is part of the ysaDCB operon. YsaD appears to modulate signal relay between
the ABC transporter and TCS-G, based on the different response of the P ysaD
promoter fusions when it is not present. Altogether, the results underscore the
unique features of this lactococcal detoxification module that warrant further
research to advance in our overall understanding of these important resistance
factors in bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 Campelo, López-González, Escobedo, Janzen, Neves, Rodríguez and 
Martínez.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01805 
PMCID: PMC7438565
PMID: 32903467 

