
1. J Food Sci. 2020 Sep 7. doi: 10.1111/1750-3841.15416. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of robust Lactobacillus plantarum and Lactobacillus pentosus
starter cultures for environmentally friendly low-salt cucumber fermentations.

Anekella K(1), Pérez-Díaz IM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food, Bioprocessing, and Nutrition Sciences, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)USDA-Agriculture Research Service-Food Science & Market Quality and Handling
Research Unit, 322 Schaub Hall, Raleigh, 27695, USA.

Seven candidates for starter cultures for cucumber fermentations belonging to the
Lactobacillus pentosus and Lactobacillus plantarum species were characterized
based on physiological features desired for pickling. The isolates presented
variable carbohydrate utilization profile on API® 50CHL test strips. The L.
pentosus strains were unable to utilize d-xylose in MRS broth or the M medium.
The lactobacilli were unable to produce histamine, tyramine, putrescine, and
cadaverine in biogenic amine broth containing the necessary precursors.
Production of d-lactic acid by the lactobacilli, detected enzymatically, was
stimulated by growth in MRS broth as compared to cucumber juice medium (CJM). The
lactobacilli utilized malic acid in the malate decarboxylase medium.
Exopolyssacharide biosynthesis related genes were amplified from the
lactobacilli. A sugar type-dependent-ropy phenotype was apparent for all the
cultures tested in MRS and CJM. The genes associated with bacteriocin production 
were detected in the lactobacilli, but not the respective phenotypes. The
antibiotic susceptibility profile of the lactobacilli mimics that of other L.
plantarum starter cultures. It is concluded that the lactobacilli strains studied
here are suitable starter cultures for cucumber fermentation. PRACTICAL
APPLICATION: The availability of such starter cultures enables the implementation
of low salt cucumber fermentations that can generate products with consistent
biochemistry and microbiological profile.

Published 2020. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/1750-3841.15416 
PMID: 32893884 

