
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 20;15(8):e0231801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231801.
eCollection 2020.

Lactobacilli and other gastrointestinal microbiota of Peromyscus leucopus,
reservoir host for agents of Lyme disease and other zoonoses in North America.

Milovic A(1), Bassam K(1)(2), Shao H(1), Chatzistamou I(3), Tufts DM(4),
Diuk-Wasser M(4), Barbour AG(1)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics, University of California
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(3)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina, United States of America.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Biology, Columbia
University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California,
United States of America.

The cricetine rodent Peromyscus leucopus is an important reservoir for several
human zoonoses, including Lyme disease, in North America. Akin to hamsters, the
white-footed deermouse has been unevenly characterized in comparison to the murid
Mus musculus. To further understanding of P. leucopus' total genomic content, we 
investigated gut microbiomes of an outbred colony of P. leucopus, inbred M.
musculus, and a natural population of P. leucopus. Metagenome and whole genome
sequencing were combined with microbiology and microscopy approaches. A focus was
the genus Lactobacillus, four diverse species of which were isolated from
forestomach and feces of colony P. leucopus. Three of the species-L. animalis, L.
reuteri, and provisionally-named species "L. peromysci"-were identified in fecal 
metagenomes of wild P. leucopus but not discernibly in samples from M. musculus. 
L. johnsonii, the fourth species, was common in M. musculus but absent or sparse 
in wild P. leucopus. Also identified in both colony and natural populations were 
a Helicobacter sp. in feces but not stomach, and a Tritrichomonas sp. protozoan
in cecum or feces. The gut metagenomes of colony P. leucopus were similar to
those of colony M. musculus at the family or higher level and for major
subsystems. But there were multiple differences between species and sexes within 
each species in their gut metagenomes at orthologous gene level. These findings
provide a foundation for hypothesis-testing of functions of individual microbial 
species and for interventions, such as bait vaccines based on an autochthonous
bacterium and targeting P. leucopus for transmission-blocking.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231801 
PMCID: PMC7446861
PMID: 32817657  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

