
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2020 Sep 8;119:104894. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104894.
[Epub ahead of print]

Live and heat-killed Lactobacillus reuteri reduce alveolar bone loss on induced
periodontitis in rats.

Moraes RM(1), Lescura CM(1), Milhan NVM(1), Ribeiro JL(1), Silva FA(1), Anbinder 
AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Oral Diagnosis, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Institute of Science and Technology, São José Dos Campos, Av. Engenheiro
Francisco José Longo, 777, 12245-000 São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Oral Diagnosis, São Paulo State University
(Unesp), Institute of Science and Technology, São José Dos Campos, Av. Engenheiro
Francisco José Longo, 777, 12245-000 São Paulo, Brazil. Electronic address:
ana.anbinder@unesp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Lactobacillus reuteri is reported as a beneficial adjunct to
conventional periodontitis treatment or as monotherapy for gingivitis in several 
clinical trials. However, probiotics are not free from the risk of adverse
effects. We investigated the effects of live and heat-killed (paraprobiotic) L.
reuteri during the development of ligature-induced periodontitis in rats.
METHODS: Thirty-two male rats were divided into four groups-control group:
healthy rats, LIP group: rats with ligature induced periodontitis, LIP/PRO group:
rats with periodontitis that received live L. reuteri, LIP/PARA group: rats with 
periodontitis that received heat-killed L. reuteri. Treatment was administered
for 30 days prior to ligation and continued for 14 days until euthanasia. The
hemimandibles were removed and submitted to radiographic analysis,
microcomputerized microtomography (μCT) and histomorphometric analysis.
RESULTS: Radiographic analysis revealed that pro- and paraprobiotics enhanced the
percentage of mesial bone support. The μCT analysis showed that paraprobiotic
treatment increased bone volume and trabecular number while decreasing total bone
porosity and trabecular separation. Live probiotic led to higher trabecular
thickness. In the histomorphometric analysis, paraprobiotics significantly
prevented furcation bone loss and collagen breakdown, although both pro- and
paraprobiotics similarly reduced mesial bone loss. There were no significant
differences in attachment loss or the number of tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase -positive cells across treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: Although viable and heat-killed bacteria reduced mesial alveolar
bone loss and ameliorated furcation microarchitecture parameters, paraprobiotics 
presented the most pronounced results preventing periodontitis development. This 
can contribute to the future use of paraprobiotics in the prevention and
treatment of periodontitis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104894 
PMID: 32950917 

