
1. Food Sci Nutr. 2020 Jul 26;8(9):5036-5047. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1801. eCollection
2020 Sep.

Evaluation of the bioprotectivity of Lactobacillus binary/ternary cultures in
yogurt.

Fayyaz N(1), Shahidi F(1), Roshanak S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology Faculty of Agriculture Ferdowsi
University of Mashhad Mashhad Iran.

The attempts toward addition of biocontrol agents in dairy products have gained
popularity. Here, we worked on analysing the antifungal activity of binary and
ternary combinations of three Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB) against five spoilage
yeasts in yogurt. The yogurt samples were characterized in terms of pH, acidity, 
WHC, textural parameters, viscosity, survivability and antifungal activity of LAB
and sensorial properties during cold storage. The results showed that the
inoculation of LAB in yogurt gave rise in significant reduction of pH throughout 
cold storage while titrable acidity and WHC decreased (p < .05). Inoculation of
LAB resulted in significant increase in hardness and adhesiveness while
springiness remained constant. On the other hand, apparent viscosity of all
samples experienced a profound increase up to the 10th day of storage followed by
a reduction trend for the rest of storage period. Analysis of inhibitory activity
of LAB showed an efficient barrier against all five yeasts, in which the most
activity was recorded for Lactobacillus reuteri followed by Lactobacillus
acidophilus. On the other hand, the most resistance yeast was Kluyveromyces
marxianus followed by Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. Sensorial analysis revealed that 
addition of LAB in yogurt brought about a profound improvement in textural
quality of samples. Inoculation of LAB cultures in yogurt at 5% (v/v) not only
could improve the physicochemical and sensorial properties of yogurt, but also
could introduce a strategy toward substituting of chemical preservatives with
biocontrol agents.

© 2020 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1801 
PMCID: PMC7500779
PMID: 32994964 

Conflict of interest statement: None.

