
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Aug 3;334:108804. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108804. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of Lactobacillus biofilms in Listeria monocytogenes adhesion to glass
surfaces.

Jara J(1), Pérez-Ramos A(2), Del Solar G(2), Rodríguez JM(3), Fernández L(1),
Orgaz B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Galenic Pharmacy and Food Technology, Veterinary Faculty,
Complutense University of Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Microorganisms and Plant Biotechnology, Biological Research
Center, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Veterinary Faculty, Complutense
University of Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Galenic Pharmacy and Food Technology, Veterinary Faculty,
Complutense University of Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: belen@ucm.es.

Listeria monocytogenes can form long-lasting biofilms on food-contact surfaces.
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) have shown promise in antagonizing this microorganism 
in liquid media. However, the ecological relationships differ when cells are
forming biofilms. In this work, we propose the use of Lactobacillus biofilms as
surface "conditioners" to modulate the adhesion of L. monocytogenes. For this,
the biofilm formation ability of Lactobacillus fermentum MP26 and Lactobacillus
salivarius MP14 (human milk origin), fluorescently labeled by transfer of the
mCherry-encoding pRCR12 plasmid, was first evaluated. Then, mature biofilms of
these strains transformed with pRCR12 for expressing the fluorescent protein
mCherry were used as adhesion substrate for GFP-tagged L. monocytogenes Scott A. 
The resulting biofilms were studied in terms of cellular population and attached 
biomass (cells plus matrix). Species distribution inside the biofilm structure
was revealed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Although none of the
Lactobacillus spp. strains reduced the adhesion of L. monocytogenes Scott A,
species interactions seem to interfere with the synthesis of extracellular
polymeric substances and species distribution inside the biofilms. In
dual-species biofilms, CLSM images revealed that Lactobacillus cells were
trapping those of L. monocytogenes Scott A. When surfaces were conditioned with
Lactobacillus biofilms, the spatial distribution of L. monocytogenes Scott A
cells was species-specific, suggesting these interactions are governing the
ultimate biofilm structure. The results here obtained open new possibilities for 
controlling L. monocytogenes dispersal using these Lactobacillus spp. biofilms as
a "natural" immobilization way. Whether species interactions could modify the
virulence of L. monocytogenes still remains unclear.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108804 
PMID: 32818764 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

