
1. Food Res Int. 2020 Oct;136:109567. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109567. Epub 2020 
Jul 21.

Portuguese cacholeira blood sausage: A first taste of its microbiota and volatile
organic compounds.

Belleggia L(1), Ferrocino I(2), Reale A(3), Boscaino F(4), Di Renzo T(4),
Corvaglia MR(2), Cocolin L(2), Milanović V(1), Cardinali F(1), Garofalo C(1),
Clementi F(1), Aquilanti L(1), Osimani A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari ed Ambientali, Università
Politecnica delle Marche, via Brecce Bianche, Ancona, Italy.
(2)Department of Agricultural, Forest, and Food Science, University of Turin,
Largo Paolo Braccini 2, Grugliasco, Torino, Italy.
(3)Istituto di Scienze dell'Alimentazione, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Via Roma 64, 83100 Avellino, Italy. Electronic address: anna.reale@isa.cnr.it.
(4)Istituto di Scienze dell'Alimentazione, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche,
Via Roma 64, 83100 Avellino, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari ed Ambientali, Università
Politecnica delle Marche, via Brecce Bianche, Ancona, Italy. Electronic address: 
a.osimani@univpm.it.

Among typical Portuguese sausages, the cacholeira blood sausage undoubtedly
represents one of the most popular preparations. To the authors' knowledge, a
lack of information on both the microbiota and the volatile organic compounds
(VOCs) of this blood-containing sausage emerges from the available scientific
literature. This study represents the first characterization of physico-chemical,
microbiological and volatile traits of Portuguese cacholeira blood sausage. To
this end, ready-to-eat cacholeira blood sausages were collected from two
production batches manufactured in summer (batch 1) and autumn (batch 2). Viable 
counts showed active microbial communities mainly composed by lactic acid
bacteria, coagulase negative cocci, enterococci and eumycetes. The metataxonomic 
approach showed a simple bacterial composition, which was dominated by
Lactobacillus sakei in both the analyzed batches (1 and 2) considered.
Carnobacterium, Enterococcus, Kluyvera, Lactococcus and Serratia were found as
minor genera. The mycobiota varied according to the production season. Batch 1
was dominated by Starmerella apicola, Debaryomyces hansenii and Candida
tropicalis, whereas batch 2 was dominated by D. hansenii. Moreover, Aspergillus
spp., Kurtzmaniella zeylanoides, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Kurtzmaniella
santamariae, Brettanomyces bruxellensis and Pichia kluyveri were detected in both
the batches as minority species. Seventy-two volatile compounds were identified, 
including esters, phenols, terpenoids, acids, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
lactones, furans, sulphur and nitrogen compounds. Significant differences were
seen in the amount of some compounds, as a feasible consequence of differences in
the raw materials, artisan production and seasonality.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109567 
PMID: 32846606 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

