
1. J Fish Dis. 2020 Sep 15. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13260. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficacy of a formalin-inactivated Lactococcus garvieae vaccine in farmed grey
mullet (Mugil cephalus).

Rao S(1), Byadgi O(1), Pulpipat T(1), Wang PC(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen
SC(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National
Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(2)International Degree Program of Ornamental Fish Technology and Aquatic Animal 
Health, International College, National Pingtung University of Science and
Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(3)Research Centre for Fish Vaccine and Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine,
National Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(4)Southern Taiwan Fish Diseases Research Centre, College of Veterinary Medicine,
National Pingtung University of Science and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.
(5)Research Centre for Animal Biologics, National Pingtung University of Science 
and Technology, Pingtung, Taiwan.

Lactococcosis [Lactococcus garvieae (LG)] is one of the most prevalent bacterial 
diseases affecting grey mullet (Mugil cephalus) aquaculture. Therefore, the
present research evaluated the efficacy of formalin-killed LG vaccine with an
oil-based adjuvant in grey mullet under laboratory and field trials. The
laboratory evaluation for LG vaccine and its cross-protection upon challenge in
grey mullet found that single-dose immunization of formalin-killed LG with
adjuvant resulted in 91.4% and 100% relative per cent survival (RPS) when
challenged with homologous and heterologous strains. The levels of specific
antibody titre and lysozyme activity increased significantly in the vaccinated
group. Immune gene expression at 24 hr after challenge showed an increase in
levels of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. A parallel field
trial experiment was conducted to investigate the long-term effectiveness of the 
LG vaccine. Results demonstrated that at one month and three months
post-immunization with heterologous strain, 100% RPS was recorded in the
vaccinated group. The findings suggested that the formalin-inactivated LG vaccine
strain (S3) protected grey mullet against LG infection for a period of three
months.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13260 
PMID: 32935338 

