
1. Food Microbiol. 2020 Oct;91:103497. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103497. Epub 2020 Apr 
3.

The use of multifunctional yeast-lactobacilli starter cultures improves
fermentation performance of Spanish-style green table olives.

Benítez-Cabello A(1), Calero-Delgado B(1), Rodríguez-Gómez F(1), Bautista-Gallego
J(1), Garrido-Fernández A(1), Jiménez-Díaz R(2), Arroyo-López FN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Food Biotechnology Department, Instituto de la Grasa (CSIC), Ctra. de Utrera
km 1, Building 46, 41013, Seville, Spain.
(2)Food Biotechnology Department, Instituto de la Grasa (CSIC), Ctra. de Utrera
km 1, Building 46, 41013, Seville, Spain. Electronic address: rjimenez@cica.es.

In this work, Lactobacillus pentosus LPG1, Lactobacillus pentosus Lp13,
Lactobacillus plantarum Lpl15, and Wickerhanomyces anomalous Y12, all of them
previously isolated from fermented table olive biofilms, were used (alone or in
combination) as multifunctional starters for Manzanilla Spanish-style green table
olive fermentations. Their performances were evaluated through the changes in the
key physico-chemical and microbiological parameters, correlation between AI-2
production and biofilm formation, inoculum imposition, metataxonomic analysis and
sensory characteristics of the finished products. Inoculation only with lactic
acid bacteria (LAB) strains led to higher titratable acidities and lower pH
values than the spontaneous fermentation (non-inoculated control), mainly during 
the first steps of processing. However, the sequential inoculation of the yeast
and then the combination of the 3 LAB strains showed the most favourable
evolution. LPG1 strain and, particularly Lp13, were excellent biofilms former and
showed the major imposition on the fruit epidermis, as corroborated by rep-PCR
analysis. Production of AI-2 was lower in the treatment inoculated exclusively
with yeast Y12 but had the highest presence in the sequential yeast-LAB inoculum,
with its maximum concentration and maximum LAB population on fruits (19th days)
strongly related. Metataxonomic analysis of the biofilms at the end of the
fermentation revealed, in addition to Lactobacillus, high proportions of
sequences from genera Marinilactobacillus, Alkalibacterium, Halolactobacillus,
and low levels of Halomonas and Aerococcus. Compositional data analysis of the
omics data revealed that Lpl15 was scarcely efficient for controlling the
spontaneous microbiota since its treatment presented the highest proportions of
Aerococcus genus. Finally, the sensory analysis showed similar characteristics
for the treatment inoculated with LPG1 and the spontaneous process, with olives
inoculated with the yeast (alone or in combination with Lactobacillus strains)
showing attractive scores. Then, inoculation of Spanish-style table olive
fermentations with a sequential yeast and LAB combination could be an advisable
practice.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103497 
PMID: 32539965 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

