
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2020 Aug 2;118:104855. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104855.
[Epub ahead of print]

Probiotic inhibits oral carcinogenesis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wan Mohd Kamaluddin WNF(1), Rismayuddin NAR(1), Ismail AF(2), Mohamad Aidid E(3),
Othman N(1), Mohamad NAH(1), Arzmi MH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Science, Kulliyyah of Nursing, International
Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia; Cluster of Oral Cancer
Research International Islamic University Malaysia (COCRII), International
Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Paediatric Dentistry and Public Health, Kulliyyah of Dentistry, 
International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia; Cluster of 
Oral Cancer Research International Islamic University Malaysia (COCRII),
International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia.
(3)Kulliyyah of Medicine, International Islamic University Malaysia, Pahang,
Malaysia; Cluster of Oral Cancer Research International Islamic University
Malaysia (COCRII), International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang,
Malaysia.
(4)Department of Fundamental Dental and Medical Sciences, Kulliyyah of Dentistry,
International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia; Cluster of 
Oral Cancer Research International Islamic University Malaysia (COCRII),
International Islamic University Malaysia, Kuantan, Pahang, Malaysia. Electronic 
address: hafizarzmi@iium.edu.my.

OBJECTIVES: This systematic review aimed to investigate the effects if probiotics
can inhibit oral carcinogenesis.
DESIGN: PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and PLOS databases were searched up to
February 2020 to identify randomised controlled trials that fulfilled the
eligibility criteria. Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Critical Appraisal Tool was
used for quality assessment of articles. This review was performed according to
the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA-P) 
2015 protocol guidelines.
RESULT: The initial search retrieved 774 articles. Of these, only five articles
were included in the qualitative synthesis. Two out of the five papers were
further analysed for quantitative synthesis in meta-analysis. The majority of the
included studies were found to be of "moderate quality". The qualitative
synthesis found four probiotics that exhibited potential therapeutic effects in
oral carcinogenesis, includingAcetobacter syzygii, AJ2, Lactobacillus plantarum, 
and Lactobacillus salivarius REN. Among them, the application of L. salivarius
REN resulted in a 95 % lower risk for developing oral cancer (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: It is known that probiotics have the potential to inhibit oral
carcinogenesis, thus supporting the hypothesis of the study. The ability of L.
salivarius REN to inhibit the development of oral cancer suggested that this
bacterium can be a potential inhibitory agent against oral carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104855 
PMID: 32801092 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declared no conflict of interest.

