
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Nov 21;10:2705. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02705. eCollection 
2019.

Screening of Host Specific Lactic Acid Bacteria Active Against Escherichia coli
From Massive Sample Pools With a Combination of in vitro and ex vivo Methods.

Ren H(1), Saliu EM(1), Zentek J(1), Goodarzi Boroojeni F(1), Vahjen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Erratum in
    Front Microbiol. 2020 Mar 20;11:459.

A novel three-step combination of in vitro and ex vivo screening was established 
to massively screen host derived lactic acid bacteria (LAB) from the broiler
chicken intestine with inhibitory activity against Escherichia coli. In a first
step, a massive sample pool consisting of 7102 broiler-derived colonies from
intestinal contents were established and sub-cultured. Supernatants thereof were 
incubated with an E. coli model strain to screen suitable isolates with
inhibitory activity. A total of 76 isolates of interest were subsequently further
studied based on either pH dependent or -independent activity in the second step 
of the assay. Here, in-depth growth inhibition of the E. coli model strain and
the potential of isolates for lactic acid production as inhibitory substance were
indexed for all isolates. Resulting scatter plots of both parameters revealed
five isolates with exceptional inhibitory activity that were further studied
under ex vivo condition in the third step of the assay. These isolates were
taxonomically classified as strains of the species Lactobacillus agilis,
Lactobacillus salivarius, and Pediococcus acidilactici. Samples from the broiler 
chicken intestine were inoculated with the Lactobacillus isolates and the E. coli
model strain. After 8 and 24 h incubation, respectively, growth of the E. coli
model strain was monitored by cultivation of the E. coli strain in antibiotic
supplemented medium. By their superior inhibitory activity against the E. coli
model strain, one L. agilis and one L. salivarius strain were selected and
characterized for further application as probiotics in broiler chicken.
Additionally, their antibiotic resistance patterns and resilience under gastric
stress of isolates were also characterized. The results of this study demonstrate
that the novel isolation procedure was able to efficiently and rapidly isolate
and identify bacterial strains from a massive sample pool with inhibitory
potential against specific types of bacteria (here E. coli). The introduction of 
the final ex vivo selection step additionally confirmed the inhibitory activity
of the strains under conditions simulating the intestinal tract of the host.
Furthermore, this method revealed a general potential for the isolation of
antagonistic strains that active against other pathogenic bacteria with specific 
biomarker.

Copyright © 2019 Ren, Saliu, Zentek, Goodarzi Boroojeni and Vahjen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02705 
PMCID: PMC6882376
PMID: 31824469 

