
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 21;11:2012. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02012. eCollection 
2020.

Effects of Bifidobacterium longum Subsp. infantis CECT 7210 and Lactobacillus
rhamnosus HN001, Combined or Not With Oligofructose-Enriched Inulin, on Weaned
Pigs Orally Challenged With Salmonella Typhimurium.

Rodríguez-Sorrento A(1), Castillejos L(1), López-Colom P(1), Cifuentes-Orjuela
G(2), Rodríguez-Palmero M(2), Moreno-Muñoz JA(2), Martín-Orúe SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Nutrición y Bienestar Animal, Departament de Ciència Animal i dels
Aliments, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain.
(2)Laboratorios Ordesa S. L., Barcelona, Spain.

Salmonella is a common causative agent of enteric disease and is developing
mechanisms of resistance to antimicrobials. Probiotics, such as bifidobacteria
and lactobacilli, and prebiotic fibers are a potential alternative to counteract 
this pathogen as they have demonstrated effectiveness in preventing its adhesion,
reducing intestinal damage, and enhancing the host immune system. Furthermore,
the benefits are expected to be potentiated when these compounds are administered
together. A trial was performed to evaluate the efficacy of two probiotic strains
(Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis CECT 7210 (Laboratorios Ordesa S.L.) and 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus HN001, combined or not with a prebiotic containing
oligofructose-enriched inulin, against Salmonella Typhimurium. Ninety-six piglets
(28 days old) were distributed into 32 pens assigned to 5 treatments: one
non-challenged (control diet, CTR+) and four challenged: control diet (CTR-) or
supplemented with probiotics (>3 × 1010 cfu/kg each strain, PRO), prebiotic (5%, 
PRE), or their combination (SYN). After 1 week of adaptation, animals were orally
challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium. Feed intake, weight, and clinical signs
were recorded. On days 4 and 8 post-inoculation (PI), one animal per pen was
euthanized, and samples from blood, digestive content, and ileal tissues were
collected to determine Salmonella counts, fermentation products, ileal
histomorphology, and serum TNF-α and Pig-MAP concentrations. The effect of the
oral challenge was evidenced by animal performance, fecal consistency, and
intestinal architecture. Regarding the experimental treatments, animals belonging
to the PRO group experienced a faster clearance of the pathogen, with more pigs
being negative to its excretion at the end of the study and recovering the
impaired ileal villi/crypt ratio more rapidly. Animals receiving the PRE diet
showed a lower intestinal colonization by Salmonella, with no countable levels
(<3 cfu/g) in any of the analyzed samples, and an augmented immune response
suggested by serum Pig-MAP concentrations. Treatments including the prebiotic
(PRE and SYN) showed similar changes in the fermentation pattern, with an
increase in the molar percentage of valeric acid concentration in the colon. The 
SYN group, however, did not show any of the outcomes registered for PRO and PRE
in Salmonella colonization or in immunity markers, suggesting the lack of
synbiotic action in this animal model. Further research is needed to better
understand the complex mechanisms behind these effects.

Copyright © 2020 Rodríguez-Sorrento, Castillejos, López-Colom, Cifuentes-Orjuela,
Rodríguez-Palmero, Moreno-Muñoz and Martín-Orúe.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02012 
PMCID: PMC7472873
PMID: 32973728 

