
1. Iran J Vet Res. 2020 Winter;21(1):26-32.

Serotypes, virulence genes and polymorphism of capsule gene cluster in
Lactococcus garvieae isolated from diseased rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
and mugger crocodile (Crocodylus palustris) in Iran.

Salighehzadeh R(1), Sharifiyazdi H(2), Akhlaghi M(2), Soltanian S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Resident of Aquatic Animal Health, Department of Clinical Sciences, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Shiraz
University, Shiraz, Iran.

Background: Lactococcus garvieae causes lactococcosis in rainbow trout in many
parts of the world.
Aims: This study was conducted for the existence of the virulent factors and
differentiation of the two serotypes in L. garvieae.
Methods: Twenty-two strains of L. garvieae isolated from diseased rainbow trout
from farms in different regions and mugger crocodile of Iran, were investigated. 
In order to rapidly detect the presence of the hly1, hly2, hly3, NADH oxidase,
sod, pgm, adhPsaA, eno, LPxTG-3, adhCI, and adhCII virulence genes, two multiplex
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays were developed. Also, simplex PCR method
was used to identify the bacterial serotypes, CGC, LPxTG-2, Adhesion, and adhPav 
virulence genes using the specific primer.
Results: All varieties of L. garvieae contained the hly1, hly2, hly3, NADH
oxidase, pgm, adhPav, LPxTG-3, sod, eno, adhPsaA, adhCI, and CGC virulence genes.
Also, adhCII gene was present in all strains except one of the isolates
originated from mugger crocodile. In addition, LPxTG-2 gene was only present in
one of the isolates belonging to mugger crocodile. Adhesion gene was not present 
in all the strains. Interestingly, all the 22 strains originated from both hosts 
were identified as belonging to the serotype I. Based on the phylogenetic
sequences of the capsule gene cluster, group all fish isolates into a cluster
together with one isolate obtained from mugger crocodile.
Conclusion: Further studies are recommended to investigate the role of virulence 
genes in L. garvieae and evaluate their pathogenicity to rainbow trout.


PMCID: PMC7183378
PMID: 32368222 

