
1. Microb Ecol. 2020 Aug;80(2):487-499. doi: 10.1007/s00248-020-01501-0. Epub 2020
Mar 23.

Vaginal Microbiome of Pregnant Indian Women: Insights into the Genome of Dominant
Lactobacillus Species.

Mehta O(1), Ghosh TS(1)(2), Kothidar A(1), Gowtham MR(1), Mitra R(1), Kshetrapal 
P(3), Wadhwa N(3), Thiruvengadam R(3); GARBH-Ini study group, Nair GB(1),
Bhatnagar S(3), Das B(4).

Collaborators: Bhatnagar S, Das B, Wadhwa N, Kshetrapal PS, Balakrish Nair BG,
Natchu UCM, Rath S, Sachdeva K, Sopory S, Misra S, Singh A, Sharma D,
Thiruvengadam R, Maitra A, Majumder PP, Maiti TK, Salunke DM, Bahl M, Sharma S,
Mehta U, Sindhu B, Arya S, Bharti R, Chellani H, Mittal P, Ramji S, Tripathi R,
Garg A, Khurana A, Hari S, Gupta Y, Tandon N, Gupta R, Bal V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Translational Health Science and Technology
Institute|, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad - Gurgaon
Expressway, PO box #04, Faridabad, Haryana, 121001, India.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Pediatric Biology Center, Translational Health Science and Technology
institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India.
(4)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Translational Health Science and Technology
Institute|, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad - Gurgaon
Expressway, PO box #04, Faridabad, Haryana, 121001, India.
bhabatosh@thsti.res.in.

The trillions of microorganisms residing in the human body display varying
degrees of compositional and functional diversities within and between
individuals and contribute significantly to host physiology and susceptibility to
disease. Microbial species present in the vaginal milieu of reproductive age
women showed a large personal component and varies widely in different ethnic
groups at the taxonomic, genomic, and functional levels. Lactobacillus iners, L. 
crispatus, L. gasseri, L. jensenii, and L. johnsonii are most frequently detected
bacterial species in the vaginal milieu of reproductive age women. However, we
currently lack (i) an understanding of the baseline vaginal microbiota of
reproductive age Indian women, (ii) the extent of taxonomic and functional
variations of vaginal microbiota between individuals and (iii) the genomic
repertoires of the dominant vaginal microbiota associated with the Indian
subjects. In our study, we analyzed the metagenome of high vaginal swab (HVS)
samples collected from 40 pregnant Indian women enrolled in the GARBH-Ini cohort.
Composition and abundance of bacterial species was characterized by
pyrosequencing 16S rRNA gene. We identified 3067 OTUs with ≥ 10 reads from four
different bacterial phyla. Several species of lactobacilli were clustered into
three community state types (CSTs). L. iners, L. crispatus, L. gasseri, and L.
jensenii are the most frequently detected Lactobacillus species in the vaginal
environment of Indian women. Other than Lactobacillus, several species of
Halomonas were also identified in the vaginal environment of most of the women
sampled. To gain genomic and functional insights, we isolated several
Lactobacillus species from the HVS samples and explored their whole genome
sequences by shotgun sequencing. We analyzed the genome of dominant Lactobacillus
species, L. iners, L. crispatus, L. gasseri, and L. paragesseri to represent the 
CSTs and identify functions that may influence the composition of complex vaginal
microbial ecology. This study reports for the first time the vaginal microbial
ecology of Indian women and genomic insights into L. iners, L. crispatus, L.
gasseri, and L. paragesseri commonly found in the genital tract of reproductive
age women.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-020-01501-0 
PMID: 32206831 

