
1. Nutr Res. 2020 Jul 6;82:44-57. doi: 10.1016/j.nutres.2020.06.019. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Dietary supplementation with Lactobacillus rhamnosus JB-1 restores brain
neurochemical balance and mitigates the progression of mood disorder in a rat
model of chronic unpredictable mild stress.

Kochalska K(1), Oakden W(2), Słowik T(3), Chudzik A(4), Pankowska A(1), Łazorczyk
A(1), Kozioł P(1), Andres-Mach M(5), Pietura R(1), Rola R(4), Stanisz GJ(6),
Orzylowska A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiography, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(2)Physical Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(3)Center of Experimental Medicine, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery and Pediatric Neurosurgery, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(5)Isobolographic Analysis Laboratory, Institute of Rural Health, Lublin, Poland.
(6)Physical Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada;
Department of Neurosurgery and Pediatric Neurosurgery, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery and Pediatric Neurosurgery, Medical University of
Lublin, Lublin, Poland. Electronic address: a.m.orzylowska@gmail.com.

Major depressive disorder is a stress-related disease associated with brain
metabolic dysregulation in the glutamine-glutamate/γ-aminobutyric acid
(Gln-Glu/GABA) cycle. Recent studies have demonstrated that microbiome-gut-brain 
interactions have the potential to influence mental health. The hypothesis of
this study was that Lactobacillus rhamnosus JB-1 (LR-JB1™) dietary
supplementation has a positive impact on neuro-metabolism which can be quantified
in vivo using magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS). A rat model of
depressive-like disorder, chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS), was used.
Baseline comparisons of MRS and behavior were obtained in a control group and in 
a stressed group subjected to CUMS. Of the 22 metabolites measured using MRS,
stressed rats had significantly lower concentrations of GABA, glutamate,
glutamine + glutathione, glutamate + glutamine, total creatine, and total
N-acetylaspartate (tNAA). Stressed rats were then separated into 2 groups and
supplemented with either LR-JB1™ or placebo and re-evaluated after 4 weeks of
continued CUMS. The LR-JB1™ microbiotic diet restored these metabolites to levels
previously observed in controls, while the placebo diet resulted in further
significant decrease of glutamate, total choline, and tNAA. LR-JB1™ treated
animals also exhibited calmer and more relaxed behavior, as compared with placebo
treated animals. In summary, significant cerebral biochemical downregulation of
major brain metabolites following prolonged stress were measured in vivo using
MRS, and these decreases were reversed using a microbiotic dietary supplement of 
LR-JB1™, even in the presence of continued stress, which also resulted in a
reduction of stress-induced behavior in a rat model of depressive-like disorder.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nutres.2020.06.019 
PMID: 32961399 

