
1. Nutrients. 2020 Sep 25;12(10). pii: E2947. doi: 10.3390/nu12102947.

The Effect of Athletes' Probiotic Intake May Depend on Protein and Dietary Fiber 
Intake.

Son J(1), Jang LG(1), Kim BY(2), Lee S(3), Park H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Exercise Nutrition & Biochemistry Lab., KyungHee University, Yongin 17104,
Korea.
(2)ChunLab, Inc., Seocho-gu, Seoul 06725, Korea.
(3)Research Lab., Ildong Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Hwaseong 18449, Korea.

Studies investigating exercise-induced gut microbiota have reported that people
who exercise regularly have a healthy gut microbial environment compared with
sedentary individuals. In contrast, recent studies have shown that high protein
intake without dietary fiber not only offsets the positive effect of exercise on 
gut microbiota but also significantly lowers the relative abundance of beneficial
bacteria. In this study, to resolve this conundrum and find the root cause, we
decided to narrow down subjects according to diet. Almost all of the studies had 
subjects on an ad libitum diet, however, we wanted subjects on a simplified diet.
Bodybuilders who consumed an extremely high-protein/low-carbohydrate diet were
randomly assigned to a probiotics intake group (n = 8) and a placebo group (n =
7) to find the intervention effect. Probiotics, comprising Lactobacillus
acidophilus, L. casei, L. helveticus, and Bifidobacterium bifidum, were consumed 
for 60 days. As a result, supplement intake did not lead to a positive effect on 
the gut microbial environment or concentration of short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs). It has been shown that probiotic intake is not as effective as ergogenic
aids for athletes such as bodybuilders with extreme dietary regimens, especially 
protein and dietary fiber. To clarify the influence of nutrition-related factors 
that affect the gut microbial environment, we divided the bodybuilders (n = 28)
into groups according to their protein and dietary fiber intake and compared
their gut microbial environment with that of sedentary male subjects (n = 15).
Based on sedentary Korean recommended dietary allowance (KRDA), the bodybuilders'
intake of protein and dietary fiber was categorized into low, proper, and
excessive groups, as follows: high-protein/restricted dietary fiber (n = 12),
high-protein/adequate dietary fiber (n = 10), or adequate protein/restricted
dietary fiber (n = 6). We found no significant differences in gut microbial
diversity or beneficial bacteria between the high-protein/restricted dietary
fiber and the healthy sedentary groups. However, when either protein or dietary
fiber intake met the KRDA, gut microbial diversity and the relative abundance of 
beneficial bacteria showed significant differences to those of healthy sedentary 
subjects. These results suggest that the positive effect of exercise on gut
microbiota is dependent on protein and dietary fiber intake. The results also
suggest that the question of adequate nutrition should be addressed before
supplementation with probiotics to derive complete benefits from the
intervention.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12102947 
PMID: 32992898 

