
1. mBio. 2020 Aug 25;11(4). pii: e01851-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01851-20.

Cervicovaginal Microbiome Composition Is Associated with Metabolic Profiles in
Healthy Pregnancy.

Oliver A(1), LaMere B(2), Weihe C(3), Wandro S(4), Lindsay KL(5), Wadhwa
PD(5)(6), Mills DA(7)(8), Pride DT(9)(10), Fiehn O(11), Northen T(12), de Raad
M(12), Li H(13), Martiny JBH(3), Lynch S(2), Whiteson K(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco.
(3)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.
(4)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, San
Diego, California, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and the Development, Health and Disease Research
Program, College of Health Sciences, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA.
(6)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, College of Health Sciences,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California, USA.
(7)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of California, Davis,
Davis, California, USA.
(8)Department of Viticulture & Enology, University of California, Davis, Davis,
California, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA.
(11)West Coast Metabolomics Center, University of California, Davis, Davis,
California, USA.
(12)Environmental Genomics and Systems Biology Division, Lawrence Berkeley
National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, USA.
(13)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for
Molecular Imaging, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(14)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine katrine@uci.edu.

Microbes and their metabolic products influence early-life immune and microbiome 
development, yet remain understudied during pregnancy. Vaginal microbial
communities are typically dominated by one or a few well-adapted microbes which
are able to survive in a narrow pH range and are adapted to live on host-derived 
carbon sources, likely sourced from glycogen and mucin present in the vaginal
environment. We characterized the cervicovaginal microbiomes of 16 healthy women 
throughout the three trimesters of pregnancy. Additionally, we analyzed saliva
and urine metabolomes using gas chromatography-time of flight mass spectrometry
(GC-TOF MS) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)
lipidomics approaches for samples from mothers and their infants through the
first year of life. Amplicon sequencing revealed most women had either a simple
community with one highly abundant species of Lactobacillus or a more diverse
community characterized by a high abundance of Gardnerella, as has also been
previously described in several independent cohorts. Integrating GC-TOF MS and
lipidomics data with amplicon sequencing, we found metabolites that distinctly
associate with particular communities. For example, cervicovaginal microbial
communities dominated by Lactobacillus crispatus have high mannitol levels, which
is unexpected given the characterization of L. crispatus as a homofermentative
Lactobacillus species. It may be that fluctuations in which Lactobacillus
dominate a particular vaginal microbiome are dictated by the availability of host
sugars, such as fructose, which is the most likely substrate being converted to
mannitol. Overall, using a multi-"omic" approach, we begin to address the genetic
and molecular means by which a particular vaginal microbiome becomes vulnerable
to large changes in composition.IMPORTANCE Humans have a unique vaginal
microbiome compared to other mammals, characterized by low diversity and often
dominated by Lactobacillus spp. Dramatic shifts in vaginal microbial communities 
sometimes contribute to the presence of a polymicrobial overgrowth condition
called bacterial vaginosis (BV). However, many healthy women lacking BV symptoms 
have vaginal microbiomes dominated by microbes associated with BV, resulting in
debate about the definition of a healthy vaginal microbiome. Despite substantial 
evidence that the reproductive health of a woman depends on the vaginal
microbiota, future therapies that may improve reproductive health outcomes are
stalled due to limited understanding surrounding the ecology of the vaginal
microbiome. Here, we use sequencing and metabolomic techniques to show novel
associations between vaginal microbes and metabolites during healthy pregnancy.
We speculate these associations underlie microbiome dynamics and may contribute
to a better understanding of transitions between alternative vaginal microbiome
compositions.

Copyright © 2020 Oliver et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01851-20 
PMCID: PMC7448280
PMID: 32843557 

