
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 30:104543. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104543. [Epub
ahead of print]

Lactobacillus acidophilus attenuates toxin production by Vibrio cholerae and
shigella dysenteriae following intestinal epithelial cells infection.

Alamdary SZ(1), Bakhshi B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: b.bakhshi@modares.ac.ir.

AIMS: The main objective of the present study was to assess and compare the
safety and inhibitory efficacy of Lactobacillus acidophilus against cholera toxin
and shigatoxin production by measuring CTX-B and Stx1 expression level in
Caco-2 cells exposed to Vibrio cholerae (as a non-invasive small intestine
pathogens and Shigella dysenteriae (as an invasive colon pathogen).
METHODS: Caco-2 cells were incubated with L. acidophilus 2 h before infection by 
V. cholerae and S. dysenteriae. Following RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis,
relative toxins mRNA levels were determined according to a comparative critical
threshold (Ct) real-time PCR. L. acidophilus didn't show any cytotoxic effect on 
Caco-2 cells.
RESULTS: L. acidophilus revealed a protective effect for Caco-2 cells against S. 
dysenteriae and V. cholera by 51% and 57%, respectively, which was determined by 
MTT assay and further confirmed by morphological examination. Pretreatment of
Caco-2 cells with L. acidophilus prior to exposure to V. cholerae, attenuated the
CTX-B expression in V. cholerae to about 1.76 folds. Expression of Stx1 by S.
dysenteriae was also down-regulated to 1.6 folds following pretreatment of
Caco-2 cells by L. acidophilus. No significant difference was observed in the
attenuator role of L. acidophilus in toxin production by S. dysenteriae as a
colon-invasive bacterium, compared with V. cholerae, the non-invasive pathogen of
small intestine.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study suggest that L. acidophilus is safe
with protective effect for human epithelial colorectal cells, and is effective
enough to be applied as a supplementary treatment for attenuation of toxin
production in acute infectious diarrhea caused by V. cholerae and S. dysenteriae.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104543 
PMID: 33010360 

