
1. Food Chem. 2020 Sep 17;340:128104. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128104. [Epub
ahead of print]

The applications of Lactobacillus plantarum-derived extracellular vesicles as a
novel natural antibacterial agent for improving quality and safety in tuna fish.

Lee BH(1), Wu SC(2), Shen TL(3), Hsu YY(4), Chen CH(4), Hsu WH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, National Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan.
Electronic address: bhlee@mail.ncyu.edu.tw.
(2)Department of Food Sciences, National Chiayi University, Chiayi, Taiwan.
Electronic address: scwu@mail.ncyu.edu.tw.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan; Center for Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan. Electronic address: shentl@ntu.edu.tw.
(4)Department of Food Safety/Hygiene and Risk Management, College of Medicine,
National Chen Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Food Safety/Hygiene and Risk Management, College of Medicine,
National Chen Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan; Center of Allergy and Mucosal
Immunity Advancement at the National Cheng Kung University, Taiwan. Electronic
address: whhsu@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Bacteria release membrane vesicles into the extracellular environment but which
activity is unclear. We investigated the applications of extracellular vesicles
(EVs) isolated from probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum to protect tuna fish
against spoilage and quality loss in this study. A significant difference was
found in EVs size obtained from L. plantarum after 8, 24, and 48 hr incubation.
The L. plantarum-derived EVs were collected and used to confirm the
anti-bacterial activity versus Shewanella putrefaciens. Finally, the tuna fish
was stored at 4 °C for 5 days after coating with EVs or sodium erythorbate, and
the quality indexes were assayed. Results indicated that EVs markedly inhibited
oxidation reaction, total volatile base nitrogen (TVBN), peroxide value (PV),
malondialdehyde (MDA), and bacteria levels. These results finding out that EVs
from L. plantarum may have potential for application in food storage technology. 
Overall, we indicated this new material may be developed as an anti-bacterial
agent for prolonging the shelf life of tuna fish.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2020.128104 
PMID: 33010644 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

