
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Aug 19. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10744. [Epub ahead of print]

An appraisal of the gut health modulatory effects of a calf faecal-origin
probiotic Lactobacillus salivarius CPN60 using Wistar rats with dextran sulfate
sodium-induced colitis.

Gupta M(1), Pattanaik AK(1), Singh A(1), Sharma S(1), Jadhav SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical & Pet Nutrition Laboratory, Division of Animal Nutrition, ICAR-Indian
Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar, India.

BACKGROUND: Probiotics of varied origins are being developed for augmenting the
gut health of human and animals. The present study aimed to evaluate the effect
of a calf-origin probiotic supplement on the gut health of Wistar rats for both
healthy and colitis conditions.
RESULTS: Forty-eight rats were randomly distributed into four equal groups. The
42-day study involved feeding basal diet alone (CON) or diet supplemented with
the calf-origin Lactobacillus salivarius strain CPN60 (PRO). The third (CONc) and
fourth (PROc) groups of rats also received the same dietary treatments (CON and
PRO, respectively) but were subjected to dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
colitis after 32 days of feeding. The results of a digestion trial conducted
after 5 days of DSS administration revealed no influence of probiotic on the
digestibility of nutrients. However, the reduced digestibility of protein and fat
seen in the CONc rats was improved in the PROc group. The concentrations of
lactate and acetate, propionate and butyrate, as well as total short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFA), were increased (P < 0.05) in the caecal and colonic digesta upon
probiotic supplementation, together with significantly reduced colonic ammonia
levels. Furthermore, there were reductions (P < 0.05) in acetate, butyrate and
total SCFA levels in the caecal contents as a result of colitis. Probiotic
supplementation increased (P < 0.05) lactobacilli and bifidobacteria counts in
the colon, whereas clostridia and coliform counts were reduced (P < 0.05). These 
were reversed by the probiotic supplementation.
CONCLUSION: Dietary supplementation of L. salivarius CPN60 had a positive effect 
with respect to improving the overall gut health of healthy rats, as well as that
of rats exposed to experimental colitis. © 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10744 
PMID: 32812651 

