
1. Pathog Dis. 2020 Aug 26. pii: ftaa044. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftaa044. [Epub ahead
of print]

Interaction between Lactobacillus reuteri and periodontopathogenic bacteria using
in vitro and in vivo (G. mellonella) approaches.

Santos TA(1), Scorzoni L(1), Correia R(1), Junqueira JC(1), Anbinder AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)São Paulo State University (Unesp), Institute of Science and Technology, São
José dos Campos, SP. Address: Av Engenheiro Francisco José Longo, 777, Jardim São
Dimas, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil. CEP: 12245-000.

Periodontitis is a multifactorial inflammatory disease, and the major cause of
tooth loss in adults. New therapies have been proposed for its treatment,
including the use of probiotics such as Lactobacillus reuteri. The objective of
this study was to evaluate the antimicrobial effects of L. reuteri: live,
heat-killed, and culture filtrate (cell free supernatant), on
periodontopathogenic bacteria (Fusobacterium nucleatum and Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans) in vitro, as well as the in vivo survival curve, hemocyte 
density, and microbial recovery using Galleria mellonella. For in vitro assays,
all preparations reduced colony forming units of F. nucleatum, while only live L.
reuteri reduced the growth of A. actinomycetemcomitans. All treatments reduced
periodontopathogenic bacteria growth in vivo. The treatment with the supernatant 
increased the survival of larvae infected with F. nucleatum more than the
treatment with live L. reuteri, and none of the treatments altered the survival
of A. actinomycetemcomitans-infected larvae. In addition, the treatment with L.
reuteri preparations did not alter the hemocyte count of F. nucleatum- and A.
actinomycetemcomitans-infected larvae. This study demonstrated that L. reuteri
preparations exerted antimicrobial effects and increased the survival of G.
mellonella infected by F. nucleatum, although only live L. reuteri was able to
reduce the growth of A. actinomycetemcomitans in vitro.

© FEMS 2020.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftaa044 
PMID: 32845308 

