
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jun 26;11:1438. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01438. eCollection 
2020.

Antibiotic Resistance-Susceptibility Profiles of Enterococcus faecalis and
Streptococcus spp. From the Human Vagina, and Genome Analysis of the Genetic
Basis of Intrinsic and Acquired Resistances.

Sirichoat A(1)(2), Flórez AB(1)(3), Vázquez L(1)(3), Buppasiri P(4), Panya M(5), 
Lulitanond V(2), Mayo B(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Bioquímica, Instituto de Productos Lácteos de 
Asturias (IPLA-CSIC), Villaviciosa, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Research and Diagnostic Center for Emerging
Infectious Diseases (RCEID), Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University, Khon
Kaen, Thailand.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Principado de Asturias (IISPA),
Oviedo, Spain.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen
University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
(5)College of Medicine and Public Health, Ubon Ratchathani University, Ubon
Ratchathani, Thailand.

The spread of antibiotic resistance is a major public health concern worldwide.
Commensal bacteria from the human genitourinary tract can act as reservoirs of
resistance genes playing a role in their transfer to pathogens. In this study,
the minimum inhibitory concentration of 16 antibiotics to 15 isolates from the
human vagina, identified as Enterococcus faecalis, Streptococcus anginosus, and
Streptococcus salivarius, was determined. Eight isolates were considered
resistant to tetracycline, five to clindamycin and quinupristin-dalfopristin, and
four to rifampicin. To investigate the presence of antimicrobial resistance
genes, PCR analysis was performed in all isolates, and five were subjected to
whole-genome sequencing analysis. PCR reactions identified tet(M) in all
tetracycline-resistant E. faecalis isolates, while both tet(M) and tet(L) were
found in tetracycline-resistant S. anginosus isolates. The tet(M) gene in E.
faecalis VA02-2 was carried within an entire copy of the transposon Tn916. In S. 
anginosus VA01-10AN and VA01-14AN, the tet(M) and tet(L) genes were found
contiguous with one another and flanked by genes encoding DNA mobilization and
plasmid replication proteins. Amplification and sequencing suggested the lsaA
gene to be complete in all E. faecalis isolates resistant to clindamycin and
quinupristin-dalfopristin, while the gene contain mutations rendering to a
non-functional LsaA in susceptible isolates. These results were subsequently
confirmed by genome analysis of clindamycin and quinupristin-dalfopristin
resistant and susceptible E. faecalis strains. Although a clinical breakpoint to 
kanamycin for S. salivarius has yet to be established, S. salivarius VA08-2AN
showed an MIC to this antibiotic of 128 μg mL-1. However, genes involved in
kanamycin resistance were not identified. Under the assayed conditions, neither
tet(L) nor tet(M) from either E. faecalis or S. anginosus was transferred by
conjugation to recipient strains of E. faecalis, Lactococcus lactis, or
Lactobacillus plantarum. Nonetheless, the tet(L) gene from S. anginosus VA01-10AN
was amplified by PCR, and cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli, to which it
provided a resistance of 48-64 μg mL-1 to tetracycline. Our results expand the
knowledge of the antibiotic resistance-susceptibility profiles of vaginal
bacteria and provide the genetic basis of their intrinsic and acquired
resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Sirichoat, Flórez, Vázquez, Buppasiri, Panya, Lulitanond and
Mayo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01438 
PMCID: PMC7333779
PMID: 32695087 

