
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Oct 1;86(20). pii: e01594-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01594-20. Print 2020 Oct 1.

Novel Selective Inhibition of Lactobacillus iners by Lactobacillus-Derived
Bacteriocins.

Nilsen T(1), Swedek I(1), Lagenaur LA(1), Parks TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Osel, Inc., Mountain View, California, USA.
(2)Osel, Inc., Mountain View, California, USA tparks@oselinc.com.

Lactobacillus iners is often associated with vaginal dysbiosis and bacterial
vaginosis (BV), which are risk factors for adverse gynecological and obstetric
outcomes. To discover natural inhibitors of L. iners, cell-free culture
supernatants (CFSs) from 77 vaginal human Lactobacillus strains and 1 human
intestinal strain were screened for inhibitory activity. Three active strains
were identified, and Lactobacillus paragasseri K7 (K7), a human intestinal
strain, produced the most potent L. iners-inhibitory activity. The active
material was purified from the K7 CFS and yielded three active peptides,
identified as components of two different class IIb, two-peptide bacteriocins,
gassericin K7A (GasK7A) and gassericin K7B (GasK7B). The peptides corresponded to
the GasK7A α peptide and the GasK7B α and β peptides. While all three peptides
exhibited individual activity against L. iners, GasK7B α was the most potent,
with an MIC of 23 ng/ml (4 nM). When combined in equal amounts, the GasK7B α and 
β peptides showed synergistic inhibition, with an MIC of 2 ng/ml (each peptide at
0.4 nM). Among the four major vaginal Lactobacillus species, the K7 bacteriocins 
selectively inhibited L. iners All 21 strains of L. iners tested (100%) were
inhibited by the K7 bacteriocins, whereas <20% of the vaginal Lactobacillus
crispatus, L. jensenii, and L. gasseri strains were inhibited. The combination of
the BV treatment metronidazole and K7 bacteriocins completely killed both L.
iners and Gardnerella vaginalis in a coculture experiment to mimic BV conditions.
In contrast, this treatment did not inhibit L. crispatus cultures.IMPORTANCE
Lactobacillus iners is a prevalent species of the vaginal microbiome, but unlike 
other major vaginal Lactobacillus species, it is not considered protective
against BV and can coexist with BV-associated bacteria. L. iners is generally the
first Lactobacillus species to emerge following the treatment of BV with
metronidazole, and mounting evidence suggests that it may contribute to the onset
and maintenance of vaginal dysbiosis. The discovery of highly potent bacteriocins
that selectively kill L. iners while sparing protective vaginal lactobacilli may 
provide novel pharmacological tools to better understand the roles of this
enigmatic bacterium in vaginal ecology and potentially lead to new and improved
therapies for dysbiosis-related conditions such as BV.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01594-20 
PMID: 32801180 

