
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Oct 16;331:108689. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108689. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

Interspecies assertiveness of Lactobacillus curvatus and Lactobacillus sakei in
sausage fermentations.

Janßen D(1), Dworschak L(1), Ludwig C(2), Ehrmann MA(1), Vogel RF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität München, Lehrstuhl für Technische Mikrobiologie,
Freising, Germany.
(2)Bayerisches Zentrum für biomolekulare Massenspektrometrie (BayBioMS),
Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany.
(3)Technische Universität München, Lehrstuhl für Technische Mikrobiologie,
Freising, Germany. Electronic address: rudi.vogel@tum.de.

Lactobacillus (L.) curvatus and L. sakei contain strains, which are assertive in 
sausage fermentation. Previous work has demonstrated differences in assertiveness
at strain level within one species, and revealed either exclusion of competitors 
by complementary partner strains or their inhibition by single strains. This work
addresses interspecies differences in the assertiveness of L. curvatus and L.
sakei. Strain sets of L. curvatus and L. sakei were employed as starters in a
fermented sausage model and their abundancy upon fermentation was determined by
strain-specific MALDI-TOF MS identification. Generally, single or groups of L.
sakei strains outcompeted L. curvatus strains. In multiple growth tests employing
mMRS and mMSM it could be shown that assertive L. sakei strains can be predicted 
along their μ max in mMSM. Still, L. curvatus TMW 1.624 could suppress all L.
curvatus and most L. sakei strains in competitive settings. This could be
referred to its expression of several bacteriocins, which are active against all 
of the L. curvatus strains. Strain specific differences could be demonstrated in 
the susceptibility of L. sakei to bacteriocins, and in oxidative stress
tolerance, which is higher in co-existing L. sakei strains than in the
bacteriocin producer. This suggests that tolerance to bacteriocins and oxidative 
stress represent additional determinants for assertiveness, above previously
reported bacteriocin production versus metabolic complementarism of partner
strains.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108689 
PMID: 32623291 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

