
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Aug 21;148:104463. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104463. [Epub 
ahead of print]

The impact of Lactobacillus on group B streptococcal interactions with cells of
the extraplacental membranes.

Shiroda M(1), Aronoff DM(2), Gaddy JA(3), Manning SD(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and
Immunology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Tennessee
Valley Healthcare System, Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, TN, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI, USA. Electronic address: mannin71@msu.edu.

Group B Streptococcus (GBS) causes adverse pregnancy outcomes and neonatal
disease. The recommended preventative measure is intrapartum antibiotic
prophylaxis, which can prevent early onset neonatal disease but not
chorioamnionitis, preterm labor, stillbirth, or late-onset disease. Novel
prevention methods are therefore needed. Use of probiotics including
Lactobacillus spp., has been suggested given that they are dominant members of
the lower reproductive tract microbiome. Although Lactobacillus was shown to
reduce recto-vaginal colonization of GBS, no studies have examined how
Lactobacillus impacts GBS in the extraplacental membranes. Since Lactobacillus
has been detected in the placental membranes, we sought to characterize
GBS-Lactobacillus interactions in vitro using a colonizing and invasive GBS
strain. While live Lactobacillus did not affect growth or biofilms in GBS,
co-culture with L. gasseri led to a 224-fold increase in GBS association with
decidualized human endometrial stromal cells for both GBS strains (p < 0.005).
Increased association did not result in increased invasion (p > 0.05) or host
cell death, though some GBS and Lactobacillus combinations contributed to a
significant reduction in host cell death (p < 0.05). Since Lactobacillus secretes
many inhibitory compounds, the effect of Lactobacillus supernatants on GBS was
also examined. The supernatants inhibited GBS growth, biofilm formation and
invasion of host cells, though strain dependent effects were observed. Notably,
supernatant from L. reuteri 6475 broadly inhibited growth in 36 distinct GBS
strains and inhibited GBS growth to an average of 46.6% of each GBS strain alone.
Together, these data show that specific Lactobacillus strains and their secreted 
products have varying effects on GBS interactions with cells of the
extraplacental membranes that could impact pathogenesis. Understanding these
interactions could help guide new treatment options aimed at reducing
GBS-associated maternal complications and disease.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104463 
PMID: 32828901 

