
1. BMC Microbiol. 2020 Sep 11;20(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s12866-020-01959-5.

Oral Lactobacillus strains reduce cytotoxicity and cytokine release from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells exposed to Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans subtypes in vitro.

Pahumunto N(1), Basic A(2), Östberg AK(2), Teanpaisan R(1), Dahlen G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Common Oral Diseases and Epidemiology Research Center and Department of
Stomatology, Faculty of Dentistry, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai,
Thailand.
(2)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Odontology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Odontology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
gunnar.dahlen@odontologi.gu.se.

BACKGROUND: This study evaluated the effect of oral lactobacilli on the
cytotoxicity and cytokine release from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
when exposed to Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans subtypes in vitro. The
supernatants and cell wall extracts (CWEs) of eight A. actinomycetemcomitans
strains, representing different subtypes, and three Lactobacillus strains were
used. The PBMCs from six blood donors were exposed to supernatants and CWEs of A.
actinomycetemcomitans or Lactobacillus strains alone or combinations and
untreated cells as control. The cytotoxicity was determined by trypan blue
exclusion method and IL-1β secretion by ELISA. TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8 secretions
were measured using Bioplex Multiplex Immunoassay.
RESULTS: Supernatants or CWEs from all bacterial strains showed cytotoxicity and 
IL-1β secretion and the subtypes of A. actinomycetemcomitans showed generally a
significantly higher effect on PBMCs than that of the Lactobacillus strains. Two 
highly toxic A. actinomycetemcomitans strains (JP2 and JP2-like) induced a higher
response than all other strains. When combined, Lactobacillus significantly
reduced the toxicity and the IL-1β secretion induced by A. acinomycetemcomitans. 
The effect varied between the subtypes and the reduction was highest for the JP2 
and JP2-like strains. The Lactobacillus paracasei strain SD1 had a higher
reducing effect than the other Lactobacillus strains. This strain had a
consistent reducing effect on all subtypes of A. actinomycetemcomitans
cytotoxicity, and release of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α from PBMCs of the blood
donors. A strong and significant variation in cytokine release between the six
blood donors was noticed.
CONCLUSIONS: Lactobacillus spp. and L. paracasei SD1 in particular, showed a
limited but statistically significant reducing interaction with A.
actinomycetemcomitans toxicity and release of cytokines in vitro.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-020-01959-5 
PMCID: PMC7488720
PMID: 32917132 

