
1. Transfusion. 2020 Jul;60(7):1492-1499. doi: 10.1111/trf.15836. Epub 2020 May 21.

Different growth kinetics in blood components and genetic analysis of Lactococcus
garvieae isolated from platelet concentrates.

Kozakai M(1), Matsumoto C(1), Matsumoto M(1), Takakura A(1), Matsubayashi K(1),
Satake M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Central Blood Institute, Blood Service Headquarters, Japanese Red Cross
Society, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In 2014, we experienced the first isolation of Lactococcus garvieae
from a platelet concentrate (PC). Thereafter, L. garvieae contamination of PCs
occurred in two more cases in Japan. It is rare that bacterial contamination with
uncommon strains like this species occurs frequently within a short period.
Therefore, we performed a detailed analysis of the characteristics of these
strains.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Three bacterial strains were identified by biochemical 
testing and molecular analysis. Genomic diversity was characterized by multilocus
sequence typing (MLST). To observe growth kinetics in blood components, PCs were 
inoculated with the three different strains.
RESULTS: All three strains were identified as L. garvieae by molecular analysis. 
Each strain belonged to a different phylogenetic group according to MLST
analysis. In the spiking trial, the three strains demonstrated differences in
their final concentrations and changes in appearance of PCs.
CONCLUSION: In this study, all three L. garvieae strains were correctly
identified by molecular analysis. Since the three strains were collected in
different regions of Japan and belonged to different phylogenetic groups
according to MLST analysis, it is suggested that L. garvieae have a wide
distribution with diversity in Japan. In PCs, the three L. garvieae strains
showed clear differences in growth kinetics and changes in appearance of PCs.
These differences may have been the primary determinant of whether PC
contamination was detected before transfusion. Moreover, L. garvieae represents
an emerging foodborne bacterium that can cause transfusion-transmitted
bacteremia. Understanding our cases may help prevent bacterial contamination of
blood products.

© 2020 AABB.

DOI: 10.1111/trf.15836 
PMID: 32436250 

