
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Feb 21;11:279. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00279. eCollection
2020.

Co-fermentation Involving Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Lactobacillus Species
Tolerant to Brewing-Related Stress Factors for Controlled and Rapid Production of
Sour Beer.

Dysvik A(1), La Rosa SL(1), Liland KH(2), Myhrer KS(3), Østlie HM(1), De Rouck
G(4), Rukke EO(1), Westereng B(1), Wicklund T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University of 
Life Sciences, Ås, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Science and Technology, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, 
Norway.
(3)Norwegian Institute of Food, Fisheries and Aquaculture Research, Ås, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Engineering Technology, KU Leuven, Ghent, Belgium.

Increasing popularity of sour beer urges the development of novel solutions for
controlled fermentations both for fast acidification and consistency in product
flavor and quality. One possible approach is the use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
in co-fermentation with Lactobacillus species, which produce lactic acid as a
major end-product of carbohydrate catabolism. The ability of lactobacilli to
ferment beer is determined by their capacity to sustain brewing-related stresses,
including hop iso-α acids, low pH and ethanol. Here, we evaluated the tolerance
of Lactobacillus brevis BSO464 and Lactobacillus buchneri CD034 to beer
conditions and different fermentation strategies as well as their use in the
brewing process in mixed fermentation with a brewer's yeast, S. cerevisiae US-05.
Results were compared with those obtained with a commercial Lactobacillus
plantarum (WildBrewTM Sour Pitch), a strain commonly used for kettle souring. In 
pure cultures, the three strains showed varying susceptibility to stresses, with 
L. brevis being the most resistant and L. plantarum displaying the lowest stress 
tolerance. When in co-fermentation with S. cerevisiae, both L. plantarum and L.
brevis were able to generate sour beer in as little as 21 days, and their
presence positively influenced the composition of flavor-active compounds. Both
sour beers were sensorially different from each other and from a reference beer
fermented by S. cerevisiae alone. While the beer produced with L. plantarum had
an increased intensity in fruity odor and dried fruit odor, the L. brevis beer
had a higher total flavor intensity, acidic taste and astringency. Remarkably,
the beer generated with L. brevis was perceived as comparable to a commercial
sour beer in multiple sensory attributes. Taken together, this study demonstrates
the feasibility of using L. brevis BSO464 and L. plantarum in co-fermentation
with S. cerevisiae for controlled sour beer production with shortened production 
time.

Copyright © 2020 Dysvik, La Rosa, Liland, Myhrer, Østlie, De Rouck, Rukke,
Westereng and Wicklund.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00279 
PMCID: PMC7048013
PMID: 32153550 

