
1. Biomed Pharmacother. 2020 Jan;121:109550. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109550. Epub
2019 Nov 5.

Gut microbiota combined with metabolomics reveals the metabolic profile of the
normal aging process and the anti-aging effect of FuFang Zhenshu TiaoZhi(FTZ) in 
mice.

Luo D(1), Chen K(1), Li J(1), Fang Z(1), Pang H(1), Yin Y(1), Rong X(1), Guo
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Unit of Modulating Liver to Treat Hyperlipemia SATCM (State Administration
of Traditional Chinese Medicine), Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou,
China; Guangdong Metabolic Disease Research Center of Integrated Chinese and
Western Medicine, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Key Unit of Modulating Liver to Treat Hyperlipemia SATCM (State Administration
of Traditional Chinese Medicine), Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou,
China; Guangdong Metabolic Disease Research Center of Integrated Chinese and
Western Medicine, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: gyguoyz@163.com.

The aging process is accompanied by changes in the gut microbiota and
metabolites. This study aimed to reveal the relationship between gut microbiota
and the metabolome at different ages, as well as the anti-aging effect of FTZ,
which is an effective clinical prescription for the treatment of hyperlipidemia
and diabetes.METHODS: In the present study, mice were randomly divided into
different age and FTZ treatment groups. The aging-relevant behavioral phenotype
the levels of blood glucose, cholesterol, triglycerides, low density lipoprotein 
cholesterol, free fatty acids, high density lipoprotein-cholesterol and cytokine 
TNF-α,IL-6, IL-8 in the serum were measured. Changes of serum metabolties were
analyzed by ultra-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
(UPLC-Q-TOF/MS). Gut microbiota were identified using 16S rDNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Our results indicated that with age, the aging-relevant behavioral
phenotype appeared, glucose and lipid metabolism disordered, secretion levels of 
cytokine TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-8 increased.The Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio
changed with age, first increasing and then decreasing, and the microbial
diversity and the community richness of the aging mice were improved by FTZ. The 
abundance of opportunistic bacteria decreased (Lactobacillus murinus,
Erysipelatoclostridium), while the levels of protective bacteria such as
Butyricimonas, Clostridium and Akkermansia increased. Metabolic analysis
identified 24 potential biomarkers and 10 key pathways involving arachidonic acid
metabolism, phospholipid metabolism, fatty acid metabolism, taurine and
hypotaurine metabolism. Correlation analysis between the gut microbiota and
biomarkers suggested that the relative abundance of protective bacteria was
negatively correlated with the levels of leukotriene E4, 20-HETE and arachidonic 
acid, which was different from protective bacteria.
CONCLUSION: Shifts of gut microbiota and metabolomic profiles were observed in
the mice during the normal aging process, and treatment with FTZ moderately
corrected the aging, which may be mediated via interference with arachidonic acid
metabolism, sphingolipid metabolism, glycerophospholipid metabolism, taurine and 
hypotaurine metabolism and gut microbiota in mice.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2019.109550 
PMID: 31704617  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

