
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jul 31;11:1331. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01331. eCollection
2020.

Alterations in the Gut Microbiome and Cecal Metabolome During Klebsiella
pneumoniae-Induced Pneumosepsis.

Wu T(1), Xu F(1), Su C(2), Li H(3), Lv N(4), Liu Y(5)(6), Gao Y(1), Lan Y(5)(6), 
Li J(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Chaohu Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital Central South University, Changsha, 
China.
(4)Department of Stomatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.
(5)Anhui Center for Surveillance of Bacterial Resistance, Hefei, China.
(6)Institute of Bacterial Resistance, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

Klebsiella (K.) pneumoniae is a common cause of pneumonia-derived sepsis in human
and is associated with high morbidity and mortality. The microbiota promotes and 
maintains host immune homeostasis during bacterial infections. However, the
mechanisms by which the gut microbiota affects immune responses in the lung still
remain poorly understood. Here, we performed cecal metabolomics sequencing and
fecal 16s rRNA sequencing in K. pneumoniae-infected mice and uninfected controls 
and showed that K. pneumoniae infection led to profound alterations in the gut
microbiome and thus the cecal metabolome. We observed that the levels of
Lactobacillus reuteri and Bifidobacterium pseudolongum were significantly
decreased in K. pneumoniae-infected mice. Spearman correlation analysis showed
that alterations in the richness and composition of the gut microbiota were
associated with profound changes in host metabolite concentrations. Further,
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including acetate, propionate, and butyrate,
were detected in cecal contents and serum by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS). We observed that the concentrations of these three SCFAs were all lower 
in the infected groups than in the untreated controls. Lastly, oral
supplementation with these three SCFAs reduced susceptibility to K. pneumoniae
infections, as indicated by lower bacterial burdens in the lung and higher
survival rates. Our data highlight the protective roles of gut microbiota and
certain metabolites in K. pneumoniae-pneumonia and suggests that it is possible
to intervene in this bacterial pneumonia by targeting the gut microbiota.

Copyright © 2020 Wu, Xu, Su, Li, Lv, Liu, Gao, Lan and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01331 
PMCID: PMC7411141
PMID: 32849494 

