
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Sep 2;8(9). pii: E1343. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8091343.

Bacterial Diversity and Antibiotic Susceptibility of Sparus aurata from
Aquaculture.

Salgueiro V(1)(2), Manageiro V(1)(2), Bandarra NM(3), Reis L(1), Ferreira
E(1)(2), Caniça M(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Reference Laboratory of Antibiotic Resistances and Healthcare
Associated Infections (NRL-AMR-HAI), Department of Infectious Diseases, National 
Institute of Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, 1649-016 Lisbon, Portugal.
(2)Centre for the Studies of Animal Science, Institute of Agrarian and Agri-Food 
Sciences and Technologies, Oporto University, 4051-401 Oporto, Portugal.
(3)Department of Sea and Marine Resources, Portuguese Institute for the Sea and
Atmosphere (IPMA, IP), 1749-077 Lisbon, Portugal.

In a world where the population continues to increase and the volume of fishing
catches stagnates or even falls, the aquaculture sector has great growth
potential. This study aimed to contribute to the depth of knowledge of the
diversity of bacterial species found in Sparus aurata collected from a fish farm 
and to understand which profiles of diminished susceptibility to antibiotics
would be found in these bacteria that might be disseminated in the environment.
One hundred thirty-six bacterial strains were recovered from the S. aurata
samples. These strains belonged to Bacillaceae, Bacillales Family XII. Incertae
Sedis, Comamonadaceae, Enterobacteriaceae, Enterococcaceae, Erwiniaceae,
Micrococcaceae, Pseudomonadaceae and Staphylococcaceae families. Enterobacter sp.
was more frequently found in gills, intestine and skin groups than in muscle
groups (p ≤ 0.01). Antibiotic susceptibility tests found that non-susceptibility 
to phenicols was significantly higher in gills, intestine and skin samples (45%) 
than in muscle samples (24%) (p ≤ 0.01) and was the most frequently found
non-susceptibility in both groups of samples. The group of Enterobacteriaceae
from muscles presented less decreased susceptibility to florfenicol (44%) than in
the group of gills, intestine and skin samples (76%). We found decreased
susceptibilities to β-lactams and glycopeptides in the Bacillaceae family, to
quinolones and mupirocin in the Staphylococcaceae family, and mostly to
β-lactams, phenicols and quinolones in the Enterobacteriaceae and
Pseudomonadaceae families. Seven Enterobacter spp. and five Pseudomonas spp.
strains showed non-susceptibility to ertapenem and meropenem, respectively, which
is of concern because they are antibiotics used as a last resort in serious
clinical infections. To our knowledge, this is the first description of species
Exiguobacterium acetylicum, Klebsiella michiganensis, Lelliottia sp. and Pantoea 
vagans associated with S. aurata (excluding cases where these bacteria are used
as probiotics) and of plasmid-mediated quinolone resistance qnrB19-producing
Leclercia adecarboxylata strain. The non-synonymous G385T and C402A mutations at 
parC gene (within quinolone resistance-determining regions) were also identified 
in a Klebsiella pneumoniae, revealing decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin. 
In this study, we found not only bacteria from the natural microbiota of fish but
also pathogenic bacteria associated with fish and humans. Several antibiotics for
which decreased susceptibility was found here are integrated into the World
Health Organization list of "critically important antimicrobials" and "highly
important antimicrobials" for human medicine.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8091343 
PMID: 32887439 

