
1. Microbiologyopen. 2020 Aug;9(8):e1065. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.1065. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

Phylogenetic analysis of Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus species isolated from
sugarcane processing streams.

Nel S(1)(2), Davis SB(1), Endo A(3), Dicks LMT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sugar Milling Research Institute NPC, c/o University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban,
South Africa.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South
Africa.
(3)Department of Food, Aroma and Cosmetic Chemistry, Tokyo University of
Agriculture, Hokkaido, Japan.

High levels of gums such as dextran, produced by Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus
spp., have a severe impact on factory throughput and sugar quality. This study
aimed to determine the phylogenetic relationships between gum-producing
Leuconostoc and Lactobacillus bacteria which were isolated from various locations
in a sugarcane processing factory at times when low- and high-dextran raw sugar, 
respectively, were produced. Phylogenetic analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences
grouped 81 isolates with the type strains of Leuconostoc mesenteroides (subspp.
mesenteroides, dextranicum, and cremoris), Leuconostoc pseudomesenteroides,
Leuconostoc lactis, and Leuconostoc citreum, respectively. Forty-three isolates
clustered with the type strain of Lactobacillus fermentum. The phylogenetic
relatedness of the isolates was determined by sequencing and analysis of the
housekeeping genes rpoA and dnaA for Leuconostoc spp. and the pheS and tuf genes 
for the Lactobacillus spp. The rpoA gene proved discriminatory for the
phylogenetic resolution of all of the isolated Leuconostoc spp. and the dnaA
housekeeping gene was shown to be effective for isolates clustering with the type
strains of Leuc. mesenteroides and Leuc. citreum. None of the loci examined
permitted differentiation at the subspecies level of Leuc. mesenteroides.
Single-locus analysis, as well as the concatenation of the pheS and tuf
housekeeping gene sequences, yielded identical phylogenies for the Lactobacillus 
isolates corresponding to L. fermentum.

© 2020 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.1065 
PMCID: PMC7424246
PMID: 32496663 

