
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Aug 24. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10757. [Epub ahead of print]

Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolomics analysis of metabolites
in commercial and inoculated pickles.

Yun L(1)(2), Mao B(1)(2), Cui S(1)(2)(3), Tang X(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2)(4), Zhao
J(1)(2), Chen W(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, PR China.
(2)School of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, PR China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology, Shanghai Engineering Research
Center of Dairy Biotechnology, Dairy Research Institute, Bright Dairy & Food Co. 
Ltd., Shanghai, PR China.
(4)National Engineering Research Center for Functional Food, Jiangnan University,
Wuxi, PR China.
(5)Beijing Innovation Center of Food Nutrition and Human Health, Beijing
Technology and Business University (BTBU), Beijing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Starter cultures are nowadays more and more used to make inoculated
pickles (IPs), but it remains unclear whether there are differences in flavors
between IPs and naturally fermented pickles. In this study 16 commercial pickles 
(CPs) produced by spontaneous fermentation method were purchased from markets in 
Sichuan province and Chongqing. Ten strains of three lactic acid bacteria species
- Lactobacillus plantarum, Leuconostoc mesenteroides and Pediococcus
ethanolidurans - were selected as single starter cultures to produce IPs.
RESULTS: Differences in flavor components between the CPs and IPs were monitored 
using a combination of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry and multivariate
statistical methods. Higher levels of nonvolatile substances such as glucose,
fructose, tagatose, sucrose, lactic acid and mannitol were detected in most IPs
than in the CPs. The values of flavor characteristics such as sweetness, umami
and astringency, which were correlated positively with consumers' overall
preferences for pickles, were higher in the IPs than in the CPs. Volatile
compounds such as geranyl acetate, dimethyl trisulfide, eucalyptol and linalool
were distinguished as the main compounds that contributed to the flavor
characteristics of the CPs. In addition to dimethyl trisulfide, dimethyl
disulfide was also an odor contributor to the IPs.
CONCLUSIONS: The CPs and IPs had different flavor characteristics, especially in 
the composition and content of volatile components, and the inoculation method
reflected some fermentation advantages, which could reduce the bitterness and
increase umami and lead to a higher score of sensory preference. This will be
helpful for industrial production. © 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10757 
PMID: 32839971 

