
1. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2020 Sep 14. doi: 10.1002/bit.27565. [Epub ahead of print]

Dynamic co-culture metabolic models reveal the fermentation dynamics, metabolic
capacities and interplays of cheese starter cultures.

Özcan E(1)(2), Seven M(3), Şirin B(3), Çakır T(4), Nikerel E(3), Teusink B(1),
Toksoy Öner E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology, Amsterdam Institute of Molecular and Life Sciences (AIMMS),
VU Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, IBSB, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Genetics and Bioengineering Department, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Gebze Technical University, Gebze, Kocaeli,
Turkey.

In this study, we have investigated the cheese starter culture as a microbial
community through a question: can the metabolic behaviour of a co-culture be
explained by the characterized individual organism that constituted the
co-culture? To address this question, the dairy-origin lactic acid bacteria
Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris, Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis,
Streptococcus thermophilus and Leuconostoc mesenteroides, commonly used in cheese
starter cultures, were grown in pure and four different co-cultures. We used a
dynamic metabolic modelling approach based on the integration of the genome-scale
metabolic networks of the involved organisms to simulate the co-cultures. The
strain-specific kinetic parameters of dynamic models were estimated using the
pure culture experiments and they were subsequently applied to co-culture models.
Biomass, carbon source, lactic acid and most of the amino acid concentration
profiles simulated by the co-culture models fit closely to the experimental
results and the co-culture models explained the mechanisms behind the dynamic
microbial abundance. We then applied the co-culture models to estimate further
information on the co-cultures that could not be obtained by the experimental
method used. This includes estimation of the profile of various metabolites in
the co-culture medium such as flavour compounds produced and the individual
organism level metabolic exchange flux profiles, which revealed the potential
metabolic interactions between organisms in the co-cultures.

© 2020 The Authors. Biotechnology and Bioengineering published by Wiley
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bit.27565 
PMID: 32926401 

