
1. Food Microbiol. 2020 Sep;90:103464. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103464. Epub 2020 Feb 
21.

Application of mannitol producing Leuconostoc citreum TR116 to reduce sugar
content of barley, oat and wheat malt-based worts.

Rice T(1), Sahin AW(2), Heitmann M(2), Lynch KM(2), Jacob F(3), Arendt EK(2),
Coffey A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Cork Institute of Technology, Bishopstown,
Cork, Ireland.
(2)School of Nutrition and Health, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Forschungszentrum Weihenstephan für Brau-und Lebensmittelqualität, Technische 
Universität München, Alte Akademie 3, 85354, Freising-Weihenstephan, Germany.
(4)Department of Biological Science, Cork Institute of Technology, Bishopstown,
Cork, Ireland. Electronic address: aidan.coffey@cit.ie.

Achieving a high monosaccharide composition in malt wort is instrumental to
achieve successful lactic acid bacteria fermentation of malt based beverages. The
conversion of monosaccharides to alternative metabolites such as the sweet
polyol, mannitol with heterofermentative strains presents a novel approach for
sugar reduction and to compensate for the loss of sweetness. This work outlines
the application of an adopted mashing regimen with the addition of exogenous
enzymes to produce wort with high fructose content which can be applied to
different malted grain types with consistently efficacious monosaccharide
production for bacterial fermentation. The so produced worts are then fermented
with Leuconostoc citreum TR116 a mannitol hyper-producer. Malted barley, oat and 
wheat were mashed to stimulate protein degradation and release of free amino
acids along with the enzymatic conversion of starch to fermentable sugars.
Amyloglucosidase and glucose isomerase treatment converted di- and
oligo-saccharides to glucose and provided a moderate fructose concentration in
malt worts which was consistent across the three cereals. Fructose was completely
depleted during fermentation with Lc. Citreum TR116 and converted to mannitol
with high efficiency (>90%) while overall sugar reduction was >25% in all malt
worts. Differences in amino acid composition of malt worts did not significantly 
affect growth of Lc. Citreum TR116 but did affect the formation of the aroma
compounds diacetyl and isoamyl alcohol. Organic acid production and acidification
of wort was similar across cereal substrates and acetic acid formation was linked
to yield of mannitol. The results suggest that differences in amino acid and
fructose content of malt worts considerably change metabolite formation during
fermentation with Lc. Citreum TR116, a mannitol hyper-producer. This work gives
new insight into the development of consumer acceptable malt based beverages
which will provide further options for the health conscious and diabetic
consumer, an important step in the age of sugar overconsumption.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103464 
PMID: 32336355 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

