
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18;86(17). pii: e01165-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01165-20. Print 2020 Aug 18.

Differential Modulation of Listeria monocytogenes Fitness, In Vitro Virulence,
and Transcription of Virulence-Associated Genes in Response to the Presence of
Different Microorganisms.

Zilelidou EA(1), Milina V(1), Paramithiotis S(1), Zoumpopoulou G(2), Poimenidou
SV(1), Mavrogonatou E(3), Kletsas D(3), Papadimitriou K(4), Tsakalidou E(2),
Skandamis PN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural University of Athens, Department of Food Science and Human
Nutrition, Laboratory of Food Quality Control and Hygiene, Athens, Greece.
(2)Agricultural University of Athens, Department of Food Science and Human
Nutrition, Laboratory of Dairy Research, Athens, Greece.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Ageing, Institute of Biosciences and
Applications, National Centre for Scientific Research Demokritos, Athens, Greece.
(4)Department of Food Science and Technology, School of Agriculture and Food,
University of Peloponnese, Kalamata, Greece.
(5)Agricultural University of Athens, Department of Food Science and Human
Nutrition, Laboratory of Food Quality Control and Hygiene, Athens, Greece
pskan@aua.gr.

Interactions between Listeria monocytogenes and food-associated or environmental 
bacteria are critical not only for the growth but also for a number of key
biological processes of the microorganism. In this regard, limited information
exists on the impact of other microorganisms on the virulence of L. monocytogenes
In this study, the growth of L. monocytogenes was evaluated in a single culture
or in coculture with L. innocua, Bacillus subtilis, Lactobacillus plantarum, or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa in tryptic soy broth (10°C/10 days and 37°C/24 h).
Transcriptional levels of 9 key virulence genes (inlA, inlB, inlC, inlJ, sigB,
prfA, hly, plcA, and plcB) and invasion efficiency and intracellular growth in
Caco-2 cells were determined for L. monocytogenes following growth in mono- or
coculture for 3 days at 10°C or 9 h at 37°C. The growth of L. monocytogenes was
negatively affected by the presence of L. innocua and B. subtilis, while the
effect of cell-to-cell contact on L. monocytogenes growth was dependent on the
competing microorganism. Cocultivation affected the in vitro virulence properties
of L. monocytogenes in a microorganism-specific manner, with L. innocua mainly
enhancing and B. subtilis reducing the invasion of the pathogen in Caco-2 cells. 
Assessment of the mRNA levels of L. monocytogenes virulence genes in the presence
of the four tested bacteria revealed a complex pattern in which the observed up- 
or downregulation was only partially correlated with growth or in vitro virulence
and mainly suggested that L. monocytogenes may display a microorganism-specific
transcriptional response.IMPORTANCE Listeria monocytogenes is the etiological
agent of the severe foodborne disease listeriosis. Important insight regarding
the physiology and the infection biology of this microorganism has been acquired 
in the past 20 years. However, despite the fact that L. monocytogenes coexists
with various microorganisms throughout its life cycle and during transmission
from the environment to foods and then to the host, there is still limited
knowledge related to the impact of surrounding microorganisms on L.
monocytogenes' biological functions. In this study, we showed that L.
monocytogenes modulates specific biological activities (i.e., growth and
virulence potential) as a response to coexisting microorganisms and
differentially alters the expression of virulence-associated genes when
confronted with different bacterial genera and species. Our work suggests that
the interaction with different bacteria plays a key role in the survival
strategies of L. monocytogenes and supports the need to incorporate biotic
factors into the research conducted to identify mechanisms deployed by this
organism for establishment in different environments.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01165-20 
PMCID: PMC7440802 [Available on 2021-02-18]
PMID: 32591377 

