
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Sep 14;335:108890. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108890. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulation of volatile release and antimicrobial properties of pink pepper
essential oil by microencapsulation in single- and double-layer structured
matrices.

Locali-Pereira AR(1), Lopes NA(2), Menis-Henrique MEC(2), Janzantti NS(3),
Nicoletti VR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unesp, São Paulo State University, Institute of Biosciences, Humanities and
Exact Sciences, Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Cristóvão Colombo 
Street, 2265, 15054-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
a.pereira@unesp.br.
(2)Unesp, São Paulo State University, Institute of Biosciences, Humanities and
Exact Sciences, Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Cristóvão Colombo 
Street, 2265, 15054-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(3)Unesp, São Paulo State University, Institute of Biosciences, Humanities and
Exact Sciences, Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Cristóvão Colombo 
Street, 2265, 15054-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
natalia.soraes-janzantti@unesp.br.
(4)Unesp, São Paulo State University, Institute of Biosciences, Humanities and
Exact Sciences, Department of Food Engineering and Technology, Cristóvão Colombo 
Street, 2265, 15054-000, São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
vania.nicoletti@unesp.br.

The bioactivity of essential oils applied in foods to act as natural
preservatives can be reduced due to interactions with other components of the
food matrix. Microencapsulation can help to increase the functionality of these
compounds. In addition, the electrostatic interaction between proteins and
polysaccharides can result in double-layered encapsulating structures, ensuring
greater protection to essential oils than using only protein as surface active
agent. In this work, pink pepper essential oil was microencapsulated by spray
drying of single-layer emulsions, stabilized by soy protein isolate (SPI), and of
double-layer emulsions, stabilized by soy protein isolate/high methoxyl pectin
(SPI/HMP). Pink pepper essential oil showed predominance of α-pinene, β-pinene,
β-mircene, δ-3-carene, d-limonene, and germacrene D. Compared to SPI
microcapsules, SPI/HMP microcapsules better preserved the total volatile content 
identified in pure oil, showed less water adsorption during storage at relative
humidity ≥75% and improved antimicrobial properties. When stored for 20 days
(25 °C/RH = 52.8%), both microcapsules allowed more gradual release of volatiles 
compared with non-encapsulated oil. Microencapsulation by spray drying did not
have negative effects on the antioxidant activity of the encapsulated oil, as the
microcapsules showed similar results to the non-encapsulated oil, around 11 μg
Trolox/mg of oil. After storage, however, the non-encapsulated oil showed greater
losses of its antioxidant activity due to higher rates of volatile release. In
the in vitro antimicrobial activity assay, both microcapsules inhibited growth of
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Listeria monocytogenes and Listeria
innocua, although no inhibition was observed against Gram-negative bacteria. When
added in milk, both microcapsules reduced bacterial growth, whereas
non-encapsulated oil showed no satisfactory inhibition. Faster reduction of
microbial growth in milk was observed for SPI/HMP microcapsules. Inhibition
results were better for skim milk than for whole milk, suggesting that the
interaction of essential oil with other lipids present in milk decreased its
bioactivity. Microencapsulation positively affected the functionality of pink
pepper essential oil, highlighting its potential for application as a natural
preservative in food products.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108890 
PMID: 32971300 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

