
1. Ital J Food Saf. 2020 Aug 19;9(2):8552. doi: 10.4081/ijfs.2020.8552. eCollection 
2020 Aug 19.

Behavior of Listeria innocua during the manufacturing and pit-ripening of
Formaggio di Fossa di Sogliano PDO cheese.

Giacometti F(1), Daminelli P(2), Fiorentini L(2), Cosciani-Cunico E(2), Monastero
P(2), Dalzini E(3), Losio MN(2), Dell'Orfano G(4), Rossini R(5), Piva S(1),
Serraino A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Ozzano
dell'Emilia.
(2)Experimental Zooprophylactic Institute in Lombardy and Emilia Romagna,
Brescia.
(3)National Reference Centre for Emerging Risks in Food Safety, Experimental
Zooprophylactic Institute in Lombardy and Emilia-Romagna, Milan.
(4)Public Health Unit of Cesena, U.O.D. Igiene degli alimenti di Origine Animale,
Forlì- Cesena.
(5)Antiche Fosse s.a.s, Sogliano al Rubicone, Forlì-Cesena, Italy.

Formaggio di Fossa di Sogliano is a traditional Italian Protected Designation of 
Origin (PDO) cheese ripened for a minimum of 5 months, with the feature of a
ripening of at least 80 to at most 100 days in pits, digged into tuffaceous rocks
according to medieval tradition of Italy. In this study, a challenge test using
Listeria innocua as a surrogate of Listeria monocytogenes was performed, with the
aim of increasing knowledge concerning the impact of the Fossa cheese process,
and especially of the traditional ripening process of this PDO, on the behaviour 
of L. monocytogenes. Pasteurized milk was experimentally inoculated with 4.5 log 
CFU/mL cocktail by three L. innocua strains, and L. innocua and Mesophilic Lactic
Acid Bacteria (LAB) counts as well as the evolution of temperatures, pH and aw
values were monitored throughout the manufacturing and ripening processes.
Throughout the ripening in maturation room a constant temperature of 8°C was
observed reaching a temperature between 10 and 15.5°C during ripening into pit.
In the final products data for LAB concentration, pH and aw values were roughly
in accordance with literature, even if some differences were, probably due to
variability of artisanal cheese productions. The numbers of L. innocua showed a
slight decrease but remained stable until the end of ripening in maturation room,
whereas a significant reduction of the microorganism was observed in the final
product, at the end of the ripening into the pit. The findings give scientific
evidence that the process of this PDO prevented the L. innocua growth, allowing
us to speculate a similar behaviour of L. monocytogenes. Based on this study, the
recommendation to extend as much as possible the ripening into pit (from 80 to
100 days) was provided to food business operators as a risk mitigation strategy
to be implemented.

©Copyright: the Author(s).

DOI: 10.4081/ijfs.2020.8552 
PMCID: PMC7459755
PMID: 32913723 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests: the authors declare no
potential conflict of interests.

