
1. Materials (Basel). 2020 Jul 20;13(14). pii: E3224. doi: 10.3390/ma13143224.

Tannic Acid with Antiviral and Antibacterial Activity as A Promising Component of
Biomaterials-A Minireview.

Kaczmarek B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomaterials and Cosmetics Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry,
Nicolaus Copernicus University in Toruń, Gagarin 7, 87-100 Toruń, Poland.

As a phenolic acid, tannic acid can be classified into a polyphenolic group. It
has been widely studied in the biomedical field of science because it presents
unique antiviral as well as antibacterial properties. Tannic acid has been
reported to present the activity against Influeneza A virus, Papilloma viruses,
noroviruses, Herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, and human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) as well as activity against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria
as Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus pyogenes, Enterococcus 
faecalis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Yersinia enterocolitica, Listeria innocua.
Nowadays, compounds of natural origin constitute fundaments of material science, 
and the trend is called "from nature to nature". Although biopolymers have found 
a broad range of applications in biomedical sciences, they do not present
anti-microbial activity, and their physicochemical properties are rather poor.
Biopolymers, however, may be modified with organic and inorganic additives which 
enhance their properties. Tannic acid, like phenolic acid, is classified into a
polyphenolic group and can be isolated from natural sources, e.g., a pure
compound or a component of a plant extract. Numerous studies have been carried
out over the application of tannic acid as an additive to biopolymer materials
due to its unique properties. On the one hand, it shows antimicrobial and
antiviral activity, while on the other hand, it reveals promising biological
properties, i.e., enhances the cell proliferation, tissue regeneration and wound 
healing processes. Tannic acid is added to different biopolymers, collagen and
polysaccharides as chitosan, agarose and starch. Its activity has been proven by 
the determination of physicochemical properties, as well as the performance of in
vitro and in vivo studies. This systematics review is a summary of current
studies on tannic acid properties. It presents tannic acid as an excellent
natural compound which can be used to eliminate pathogenic factors as well as a
revision of current studies on tannic acid composed with biopolymers and active
properties of the resulting complexes.

DOI: 10.3390/ma13143224 
PMCID: PMC7412100
PMID: 32698426 

