
1. Microb Ecol. 2020 Sep 30. doi: 10.1007/s00248-020-01609-3. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic Analysis Reveals Common Adaptation Mechanisms Under Different
Stresses for Moderately Piezophilic Bacteria.

Wang H(1), Zhang Y(2)(3)(4), Bartlett DH(5), Xiao X(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
zhang.yusjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.
(3)School of Oceanography, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
zhang.yusjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, School of Naval Architecture, Ocean
and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
zhang.yusjtu@sjtu.edu.cn.
(5)Center for Marine Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, School of Naval Architecture, Ocean
and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(7)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Pilot National Laboratory for
Marine Science and Technology (Qingdao), Qingdao, China.

Piezophiles, by the commonly accepted definition, grow faster under high
hydrostatic pressure (HHP) than under ambient pressure and are believed to exist 
only in pressurized environments where life has adapted to HHP during evolution. 
However, recent findings suggest that piezophiles have developed a common
adaptation strategy to cope with multiple types of stresses including HHP. These 
results raise a question on the ecological niches of piezophiles: are piezophiles
restricted to habitats with HHP? In this study, we observed that the bacterial
strains Sporosarcina psychrophila DSM 6497 and Lysinibacillus sphaericus LMG
22257, which were isolated from surface environments and then transferred under
ambient pressure for half a century, possess moderately piezophilic
characteristics with optimal growth pressures of 7 and 20 MPa, respectively.
Their tolerance to HHP was further enhanced by MgCl2 supplementation under the
highest tested pressure of 50 MPa. Transcriptomic analysis was performed to
compare gene expression with and without MgCl2 supplementation under 50 MPa for
S. psychrophila DSM 6497. Among 4390 genes or transcripts obtained, 915
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified. These DEGs are primarily
associated with the antioxidant defense system, intracellular compatible solute
accumulation, and membrane lipid biosynthesis, which have been reported to be
essential for cells to cope with HHP. These findings indicate no in situ pressure
barrier for piezophile isolation, and cells may adopt a common adaptation
strategy to cope with different stresses.

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-020-01609-3 
PMID: 32995929 

