
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Sep;159(3):969-983.e4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.004. 
Epub 2020 May 6.

Aspirin Reduces Colorectal Tumor Development in Mice and Gut Microbes Reduce its 
Bioavailability and Chemopreventive Effects.

Zhao R(1), Coker OO(1), Wu J(2), Zhou Y(1), Zhao L(1), Nakatsu G(1), Bian X(2),
Wei H(3), Chan AWH(4), Sung JJY(1), Chan FKL(1), El-Omar E(5), Yu J(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease and 
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Sciences, Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(2)Macau Institute for Applied Research in Medicine and Health, State Key
Laboratory for Quality Research in Chinese Medicines, Macau University of Science
and Technology, Macau, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Animal Science, College of Basic Medical Sciences,
Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China; Department of Precision
Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou,
China.
(4)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Microbiome Research Centre, St George & Sutherland Clinical School, University
of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(6)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease and 
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health
Sciences, Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China. Electronic address: junyu@cuhk.edu.hk.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Jul;17(7):383.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Alterations in the intestinal microbiota affect development of
colorectal cancer and drug metabolism. We studied whether the intestinal
microbiota affect the ability of aspirin to reduce colon tumor development in
mice.
METHODS: We performed studies with APCmin/+ mice and mice given azoxymethane and 
dextran sulfate sodium to induce colorectal carcinogenesis. Some mice were given 
antibiotics to deplete intestinal microbes, with or without aspirin, throughout
the entire experiment. Germ-free mice were studied in validation experiments.
Colon tissues were collected and analyzed by histopathology, quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and immunoblots. Blood samples
and gut luminal contents were analyzed by liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry
and an arylesterase activity assay. Fecal samples were analyzed by 16S ribosomal 
RNA gene and shotgun metagenome sequencing.
RESULTS: Administration of aspirin to mice reduced colorectal tumor number and
load in APCmin/+ mice and mice given azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium that
had been given antibiotics (depleted gut microbiota), but not in mice with intact
microbiota. Germ-free mice given aspirin developed fewer colorectal tumors than
conventionalized germ-free mice given aspirin. Plasma levels of aspirin were
higher in mice given antibiotics than in mice with intact gut microbiota.
Analyses of luminal contents revealed that aerobic gut microbes, including
Lysinibacillus sphaericus, degrade aspirin. Germ-free mice fed L sphaericus had
lower plasma levels of aspirin than germ-free mice that were not fed this
bacterium. There was an inverse correlation between aspirin dose and colorectal
tumor development in conventional mice, but this correlation was lost with
increased abundance of L sphaericus. Fecal samples from mice fed aspirin were
enriched in Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus genera, which are considered
beneficial, and had reductions in Alistipes finegoldii and Bacteroides fragili,
which are considered pathogenic.
CONCLUSIONS: Aspirin reduces development of colorectal tumors in APCmin/+ mice
and mice given azoxymethane and dextran sulfate sodium, depending on the presence
of intestinal microbes. L sphaericus in the gut degrades aspirin and reduced its 
chemopreventive effects in mice. Fecal samples from mice fed aspirin were
enriched in beneficial bacteria, with reductions in pathogenic bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.004 
PMID: 32387495 

