
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Jun 9. pii: jiaa324. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa324. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Members of Prevotella genus distinctively modulate innate immune and barrier
functions in a human three-dimensional endometrial epithelial cell model.

Ilhan ZE(1), Łaniewski P(2), Tonachio A(2), Herbst-Kralovetz MM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine-Phoenix,
University of Arizona, Phoenix, USA.
(2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine-Phoenix, University 
of Arizona, Phoenix, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prevotella species are commonly isolated from the reproductive tract 
of women with obstetric/gynecologic health complications. However, contributions 
of this genus to changes in the local microenvironment are not well
characterized. Our objective was to evaluate species-specific effects of
Prevotella on the human endometrial epithelium.
METHODS: Thirteen Prevotella strains, originally isolated from the human oral
cavity, amniotic fluid, endometrium or vagina (including women with bacterial
vaginosis), were obtained from BEI/ATCC resources. Bacteria were evaluated
in-silico, and in-vitro using human endometrial epithelial cells (EEC) grown as
monolayers or a three-dimensional (3-D) model.
RESULTS: Genomic characterization illustrated metabolic and phylogenetic
diversity of Prevotella genus. Among the tested species, P. disiens exhibited
cytotoxicity. Scanning electron microscopy analysis of the 3-D EEC model revealed
species-specific colonization patterns and alterations of ultracellular
structures. Infection with sialidase-producing P. timonensis resulted in
elongated microvilli, increased MUC3 and MUC4 expression. Infections with
Prevotella species, including P. bivia, did not result in significant
pro-inflammatory activation of EEC.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, findings indicate that Prevotella species are
metabolically diverse and overall not cytotoxic or overtly inflammatory in EEC;
however, these bacteria can form biofilms, alter barrier properties of the
endometrial epithelium and ultimately impact colonization of secondary
colonizers.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa324 
PMID: 32515473 

