
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2019 Nov;75:103983. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103983. Epub
2019 Jul 26.

Genome-based taxonomic revision detects a number of synonymous taxa in the genus 
Mycobacterium.

Tortoli E(1), Meehan CJ(2), Grottola A(3), Fregni Serpini G(3), Fabio A(3),
Trovato A(4), Pecorari M(3), Cirillo DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milano, Italy. Electronic address: tortoli.enrico@hsr.it.
(2)BCCM/ITM Mycobacterial Culture Collection, Department of Biomedical Science,
Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
(3)Microbiology and Virology Unit, University Hospital Polyclinic, Modena, Italy.
(4)Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milano, Italy.

The aim of this study was to clarify the taxonomic status of named species within
the genus Mycobacterium. The analysis of genomes belonging to 174 taxa (species
or subspecies) of the genus Mycobacterium was conducted using both the Average
Nucleotide Identity and the Genome to Genome Distance. A number of synonymous
taxa were detected. The list of synonyms includes: two subspecies of M. chelonae 
(M. chelonae subsp. bovis and M. chelonae subsp. gwanakae), two subspecies of M. 
fortuitum (M. fortuitum subsp. fortuitum and M. fortuitum subsp.
acetamidolyticum), four subspecies of M. avium (M. avium subsp. avium, M. avium
subsp. silvaticum, M. avium subsp. paratuberculosis and "M. avium subsp.
hominissuis"), two couples of subspecies of M. intracellulare (M. intracellulare 
subsp. intracellulare/M. intracellulare subsp. paraintracellulare and M.
intracellulare subsp. chimaera/M. intracellulare subsp. yongonense), the species 
M. austroafricanum and M. vanbaalenii, the species M. senegalense and M.
conceptionense, the species M. talmoniae and M. eburneum and the species M.
marinum, M. ulcerans and M. pseudoshottsii. Furthermore one species were
reclassified as subspecies of another mycobacterium: M. lepraemurium was
reclassified as a subspecies of M. avium (M. avium subsp. lepraemurium). The
updates to nomenclature are proposed basing on the priority of names according
the Code of nomenclature of prokaryotes. For two species (M. bouchedurhonense and
M. marseillense) the loss of standing in nomenclature is proposed because of
unavailability of respective type strains in culture collections.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2019.103983 
PMID: 31352146  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

