
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jan 7;86(2). pii: e01905-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01905-19. Print 2020 Jan 7.

Substrate Use Prioritization by a Coculture of Five Species of Gut Bacteria Fed
Mixtures of Arabinoxylan, Xyloglucan, β-Glucan, and Pectin.

Liu Y(1), Heath AL(2), Galland B(3), Rehrer N(4), Drummond L(5), Wu XY(6), Bell
TJ(7), Lawley B(1), Sims IM(7), Tannock GW(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(2)Department of Human Nutrition, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)Department of Women's and Children's Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(4)School of Physical Education, Sport and Exercise Sciences, University of
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(5)Drummond Food Advisory, Ltd., Killinchy, New Zealand.
(6)Department of Food Science and Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China.
(7)The Ferrier Research Institute, Victoria University of Wellington, Petone, New
Zealand.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand gerald.tannock@otago.ac.nz.
(9)Riddet Centre of Research Excellence, Massey University, Palmerston North, New
Zealand.

Dietary fiber provides growth substrates for bacterial species that belong to the
colonic microbiota of humans. The microbiota degrades and ferments substrates,
producing characteristic short-chain fatty acid profiles. Dietary fiber contains 
plant cell wall-associated polysaccharides (hemicelluloses and pectins) that are 
chemically diverse in composition and structure. Thus, depending on plant
sources, dietary fiber daily presents the microbiota with mixtures of plant
polysaccharides of various types and complexity. We studied the extent and
preferential order in which mixtures of plant polysaccharides (arabinoxylan,
xyloglucan, β-glucan, and pectin) were utilized by a coculture of five bacterial 
species (Bacteroides ovatus, Bifidobacterium longum subspecies longum,
Megasphaera elsdenii, Ruminococcus gnavus, and Veillonella parvula). These
species are members of the human gut microbiota and have the biochemical
capacity, collectively, to degrade and ferment the polysaccharides and produce
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). B. ovatus utilized glycans in the order
β-glucan, pectin, xyloglucan, and arabinoxylan, whereas B. longum subsp. longum
utilization was in the order arabinoxylan, arabinan, pectin, and β-glucan.
Propionate, as a proportion of total SCFAs, was augmented when polysaccharide
mixtures contained galactan, resulting in greater succinate production by B.
ovatus and conversion of succinate to propionate by V. parvula Overall, we
derived a synthetic ecological community that carries out SCFA production by the 
common pathways used by bacterial species for this purpose. Systems like this
might be used to predict changes to the emergent properties of the gut ecosystem 
when diet is altered, with the aim of beneficially affecting human
physiology.IMPORTANCE This study addresses the question as to how bacterial
species, characteristic of the human gut microbiota, collectively utilize
mixtures of plant polysaccharides such as are found in dietary fiber. Five
bacterial species with the capacity to degrade polymers and/or produce acidic
fermentation products detectable in human feces were used in the experiments. The
bacteria showed preferential use of certain polysaccharides over others for
growth, and this influenced their fermentation output qualitatively. These kinds 
of studies are essential in developing concepts of how the gut microbial
community shares habitat resources, directly and indirectly, when presented with 
mixtures of polysaccharides that are found in human diets. The concepts are
required in planning dietary interventions that might correct imbalances in the
functioning of the human microbiota so as to support measures to reduce metabolic
conditions such as obesity.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01905-19 
PMCID: PMC6952225
PMID: 31676481  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

