
1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2020 May 7;525(3):720-725. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.02.146. Epub 2020 Mar 3.

Structural basis of substrate recognition by the substrate binding protein (SBP) 
of a hydrazide transporter, obtained from Microbacterium hydrocarbonoxydans.

Shimamura K(1), Akiyama T(1), Yokoyama K(1), Takenoya M(1), Ito S(1), Sasaki
Y(1), Yajima S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Bioscience, Tokyo University of Agriculture, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo,
Japan. Electronic address: yshun@nodai.ac.jp.

Microbacterium hydrocarbonoxydans was isolated, using hydrazide compounds as its 
sole carbon source. The key enzyme that metabolizes these compounds was
identified as hydrazidase, and the operon containing the gene coding for the
enzyme, was revealed by genome sequencing. The operon also contained genes coding
for an ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABC transporter), which was expected to 
transport the hydrazide compounds. Substrate binding protein (SBP), a component
subunit of the transporter, plays an important role in recognizing the correct
substrates for transport. Therefore, to elucidate the mechanism of recognition of
the unnatural hydrazide compounds, we determined the crystal structures of the
SBP, obtained from M. hydrocarbonoxydans (Mh-SBP), complexed with and without the
hydrazide compound, at 2.2 Å and 1.75 Å resolutions, respectively. The overall
structures of Mh-SBP were similar to those of the SBP in oligopeptide
transporters such as OppA. On comparison, the liganded and unliganded structures 
of Mh-SBP showed an open - close conformation change. Interestingly, the binding 
mode of the compound to Mh-SBP was almost identical to that of the compound to
hydrazidase, suggesting that the ABC transporter served transporting these
compounds. Furthermore, based on the hydrazide complex structure, paraben, the
other putative substrate of the protein, was successfully used with Mh-SBP to
obtain the paraben complex structure.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2020.02.146 
PMID: 32143826 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest No potential
conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

