
1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2020 Oct 1;202:110953. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110953.
Epub 2020 Jul 13.

Discrimination of heavy metal acclimated environmental strains by chemometric
analysis of FTIR spectra.

Kepenek ES(1), Severcan M(2), Gozen AG(1), Severcan F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, 06800,
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, School of Engineering
and Natural Sciences, Altinbas University, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: 
mete.severcan@altinbas.edu.tr.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Middle East Technical University, 06800,
Ankara, Turkey; Department of Biophysics, Faculty of Medicine, Altinbas
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Heavy metal acclimated bacteria are profoundly the preferred choice for
bioremediation studies. Bacteria get acclimated to toxic concentrations of heavy 
metals by induction of specific enzymes and genetic selection favoring new
metabolic abilities leading to activation of one or several of resistance
mechanisms creating bacterial populations with differences in resistance profile 
and/or level. Therefore, to use in bioremediation processes, it is important to
discriminate acclimated bacterial populations and choose a more resistant strain.
In this study, we discriminated heavy metal acclimated bacteria by using
Attenuated Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy
and multivariate analysis methods namely Hierarchical Cluster Analysis (HCA),
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Soft Independent Modeling of Class Analogy
(SIMCA). Two acclimation methods, acute and gradual, were used which cause
differences in molecular changes resulting in bacterial populations with
different molecular and resistance profiles. Brevundimonas sp., Gordonia sp., and
Microbacterium oxydans were exposed to the toxic concentrations of Cd (30 μg/ml) 
or Pb (90 μg/ml) by using broth medium as a growth media. Our results revealed
that PCA and HCA clearly discriminated the acute-acclimated, gradual-acclimated, 
and control bacteria from each other in protein, carbohydrate, and whole spectral
regions. Furthermore, we classified acclimated (acute and gradual) and control
bacteria more accurately by using SIMCA with 99.9% confidence. This study
demonstrated that heavy metal acclimated and control group bacteria can be
discriminated by using chemometric analysis of FTIR spectra in a powerful,
cost-effective, and handy way. In addition to the determination of the most
appropriate acclimation procedure, this approach can be used in the detection of 
the most resistant bacterial strains to be used in bioremediation studies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110953 
PMID: 32800227  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

