
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Apr 30;8:340. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00340.
eCollection 2020.

Development of a Continuous Pulsed Electric Field (PEF) Vortex-Flow Chamber for
Improved Treatment Homogeneity Based on Hydrodynamic Optimization.

Schottroff F(1), Knappert J(2), Eppmann P(2), Krottenthaler A(1), Horneber T(2), 
McHardy C(2), Rauh C(2), Jaeger H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Technology, Department of Food Science and Technology,
University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU), Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Food Technology and Food Chemistry, Department of Food
Biotechnology and Food Process Engineering, Technische Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Pulsed electric fields (PEF) treatment is an effective process for preservation
of liquid products in food and biotechnology at reduced temperatures, by causing 
electroporation. It may contribute to increase retention of heat-labile
constituents with similar or enhanced levels of microbial inactivation, compared 
to thermal processes. However, especially continuous PEF treatments suffer from
inhomogeneous treatment conditions. Typically, electric field intensities are
highest at the inner wall of the chamber, where the flow velocity of the treated 
product is lowest. Therefore, inhomogeneities of the electric field within the
treatment chamber and associated inhomogeneous temperature fields emerge. For
this reason, a specific treatment chamber was designed to obtain more homogeneous
flow properties inside the treatment chamber and to reduce local temperature
peaks, therefore increasing treatment homogeneity. This was accomplished by a
divided inlet into the chamber, consequently generating a swirling flow (vortex).
The influence of inlet angles on treatment homogeneity was studied (final values:
radial angle α = 61°; axial angle β = 98°), using computational fluid dynamics
(CFD). For the final design, the vorticity, i.e., the intensity of the fluid
rotation, was the lowest of the investigated values in the first treatment zone
(1002.55 1/s), but could be maintained for the longest distance, therefore
providing an increased mixing and most homogeneous treatment conditions. The new 
design was experimentally compared to a conventional co-linear setup, taking into
account inactivation efficacy of Microbacterium lacticum as well as retention of 
heat-sensitive alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Results showed an increase in M.
lacticum inactivation (maximum Δlog of 1.8 at pH 7 and 1.1 at pH 4) by the vortex
configuration and more homogeneous treatment conditions, as visible by the
simulated temperature fields. Therefore, the new setup can contribute to optimize
PEF treatment conditions and to further extend PEF applications to currently
challenging products.

Copyright © 2020 Schottroff, Knappert, Eppmann, Krottenthaler, Horneber, McHardy,
Rauh and Jaeger.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00340 
PMCID: PMC7203427
PMID: 32426339 

