
1. mSystems. 2020 Aug 4;5(4). pii: e00527-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00527-20.

Precise Species Identification for Enterobacter: a Genome Sequence-Based Study
with Reporting of Two Novel Species, Enterobacter quasiroggenkampii sp. nov. and 
Enterobacter quasimori sp. nov.

Wu W(#)(1)(2), Feng Y(#)(1)(3)(4), Zong Z(5)(3)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, West
China Second Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, China.
(4)Center for Pathogen Research, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(5)Center of Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China zongzhiy@scu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Infection Control, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The genus Enterobacter comprises common pathogens and has a complicated taxonomy.
Precise taxonomic assignation lays a foundation for microbiology. In this study, 
we updated the Enterobacter taxonomy based on robust genome analyses. We found
that all Enterobacter subspecies assignments were incorrect. Enterobacter cloacae
subsp. dissolvens and Enterobacter hormaechei subsp. hoffmannii are species
(Enterobacter dissolvens and Enterobacter hoffmannii, respectively) rather than
subspecies. Enterobacter xiangfangensis, Enterobacter hormaechei subsp. oharae,
and Enterobacter hormaechei subsp. steigerwaltii are not Enterobacter hormaechei 
subspecies but belong to the same species (Enterobacter xiangfangensis).
Enterobacter timonensis should be removed to Pseudenterobacter, a novel genus. We
then reported two novel species, Enterobacter quasiroggenkampii and Enterobacter 
quasimori, by genome- and phenotype-based characterization. We also applied the
updated taxonomy to curate 1,997 Enterobacter genomes in GenBank. Species
identification was changed following our updated taxonomy for the majority of
publicly available strains (1,542, 77.2%). The most common Enterobacter species
was E. xiangfangensis We identified 14 novel tentative Enterobacter
genomospecies. This study highlights that updated and curated taxonomic
assignments are the premise of correct identification.IMPORTANCE Enterobacter
species are major human pathogens. Precise species identification lays a
foundation for microbiology, but the taxonomy of Enterobacter is complicated and 
confusing. In this study, first, we significantly updated the taxonomy of
Enterobacter by rigorous genome analyses and found that all subspecies
assignments of Enterobacter were incorrect. Second, we characterized and reported
two novel Enterobacter species with clinical significance. Third, we curated
1,997 Enterobacter genome sequences deposited in GenBank and found that the
species identification of most Enterobacter strains needed to be corrected.
Fourth, we found that the most common Enterobacter species seen in clinical
samples is Enterobacter xiangfangensis rather than Enterobacter cloacae Fifth, we
identified 14 tentative novel Enterobacter and 18 tentative novel
non-Enterobacter species. This study highlights that updated and curated
taxonomic assignments are the premise of correct species identification. We
recommend that future Enterobacter studies need to use the updated taxonomy to
avoid misleading information.

Copyright © 2020 Wu et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00527-20 
PMCID: PMC7406230
PMID: 32753511 

