
1. Analyst. 2020 Sep 28;145(19):6283-6290. doi: 10.1039/d0an01147a.

Integrated on-site collection and detection of airborne microparticles for
smartphone-based micro-climate quality control.

Ryu B (1), Chen J , Kurabayashi K , Liang X , Park Y .

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA. bhryu@umich.edu katsuo@umich.edu xiaoganl@umich.edu ygpark@umich.edu.

The rapid emergence of air-mediated diseases in a micro-climate demands on-site
monitoring of airborne microparticles. The on-site detection of airborne
microparticles becomes more challenging as the particles are highly localized and
change dynamically over time. However, most existing monitoring systems rely on
time-consuming sample collection and centralized off-site analysis. Here, we
report a smartphone-based integrated microsystem for on-site collection and
detection that enables real-time detection of indoor airborne microparticles with
high sensitivity. The collection device, inspired by the Venturi effect, was
designed to collect airborne microparticles without requiring an additional power
supply. Our systematic analysis showed that the collection device was able to
collect microparticles with consistent negative pressure, regardless of the
particle concentration in the air sample. By incorporating a microfluidic-biochip
based on inertial force to trap particles and an optoelectronic photodetector
into a miniaturized device with a smartphone, we demonstrate real-time and
sensitive detection of the collected airborne microparticles, such as Escherichia
coli, Bacillus subtilis, Micrococcus luteus, and Staphylococcus with a
particle-density dynamic range of 103-108 CFU mL-1. Because of its capabilities
of minimal-power sample collection, high sensitivity, and rapid detection of
airborne microparticles, this integrated platform can be readily adopted by the
government and industrial sectors to monitor indoor air contamination and improve
human healthcare.

DOI: 10.1039/d0an01147a 
PMID: 32945327 

