
1. J Anim Physiol Anim Nutr (Berl). 2020 Jan;104(1):116-125. doi: 10.1111/jpn.13208.
Epub 2019 Sep 26.

Effects of supplementing freeze-dried Mitsuokella jalaludinii phytase on the
growth performance and gut microbial diversity of broiler chickens.

Tang HC(1), Sieo CC(1)(2), Abdullah N(1)(3), Chong CW(4), Gan HM(5), Mohd Asrore 
MS(1), Yong CY(1)(2), Omar AR(1), Ho YW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor,
Malaysia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Institute of Tropical Agriculture and Food Security, Universiti Putra
Malaysia, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, Bandar
Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia.
(5)School of Science, Monash University Malaysia, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, Bandar
Sunway, Selangor, Malaysia.

Inclusion of phytase in animal feedstuff is a common practice to enhance
nutrients availability. However, little is known about the effects of phytase
supplementation on the microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract. In this
study, freeze-dried Mitsuokella jalaludinii phytase (MJ) was evaluated in a
feeding trial with broilers fed a low available phosphorus (aP) diet. A total of 
180 male broiler chicks (day-old Cobb) were assigned into three dietary
treatments: Control fed with 0.4% (w/w) of available phosphorus (aP); Group T1
fed low aP [0.2% (w/w)] supplemented with MJ; and T2 fed low aP and deactivated
MJ. The source of readily available P, dicalcium phosphate (DCP), was removed
from low aP diet, whereby additional limestone was provided to replace the amount
of Ca normally found in DCP. For each treatment, 4 replicate pens were used,
where each pen consisted of 15 animals. The animals' energy intake and caecal
bacterial community were monitored weekly for up to 3 weeks. The apparent
metabolizable energy (AME) and apparent digestibility of dry matter (ADDM) of
broilers fed with different diets were determined. In addition, the caecal
microbial diversities of broilers were assessed using high-throughput
next-generation sequencing targeting the V3-V4 region of bacterial 16S rRNA. The 
results showed that broilers fed with T1 diet have better feed conversion ratio
(FCR) when compared to the Control (p < .05) and T2 diets (p < .05),
demonstrating the efficiency of MJ as a supplement to low aP diet. Nevertheless, 
MJ did not significantly affect the microbial population and diversity in
broilers' caeca, which mainly consists of members from Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes,
and Proteobacteria. Regardless, significant variations in the caecal bacterial
composition were observed over time, probably due to succession as the broilers
aged. This is the first reported study on the effect of MJ on the microbial
diversity of broiler's caeca.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/jpn.13208 
PMID: 31556187 

