
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 17;15(8):e0237249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237249.
eCollection 2020.

Phylogenetic evidence for the invasion of a commercialized European
Phasmarhabditis hermaphrodita lineage into North America and New Zealand.

Howe DK(1), Ha AD(1), Colton A(2), De Ley IT(3), Rae RG(4), Ross J(5)(6)(7),
Wilson M(8), Nermut J(9), Zhao Z(10), Mc Donnell RJ(2), Denver DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Crop and Soil Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
Oregon, United States of America.
(3)Department of Nematology, University of California-Riverside, Riverside,
California, United States of America.
(4)School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Liverpool John Moores
University, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Conservation Ecology and Entomology, Faculty of AgriSciences,
Stellenbosch University, Matieland, South Africa.
(6)Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Aberdeen,
Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
(7)Crop Health and Protection (CHAP), National Agri-Food Innovation Campus, Sand 
Hutton, York, United Kingdom.
(8)Independent Researcher/Consultant, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(9)Biology Centre CAS, Institute of Entomology, Branišovská, České Budějovice,
Czech Republic.
(10)Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Biological control (biocontrol) as a component of pest management strategies
reduces reliance on synthetic chemicals, and seemingly offers a natural approach 
that minimizes environmental impact. However, introducing a new organism to new
environments as a classical biocontrol agent can have broad and unanticipated
biodiversity effects and conservation consequences. Nematodes are currently used 
in a variety of commercial biocontrol applications, including the use of
Phasmarhabditis hermaphrodita as an agent targeting pest slug and snail species. 
This species was originally discovered in Germany, and is generally thought to
have European origins. P. hermaphrodita is sold under the trade name Nemaslug®,
and is available only in European markets. However, this nematode species was
discovered in New Zealand and the western United States, though its specific
origins remained unclear. In this study, we analyzed 45 nematode strains
representing eight different Phasmarhabditis species, collected from nine
countries around the world. A segment of nematode mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was
sequenced and subjected to phylogenetic analyses. Our mtDNA phylogenies were
overall consistent with previous analyses based on nuclear ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
loci. The recently discovered P. hermaphrodita strains in New Zealand and the
United States had mtDNA haplotypes nearly identical to that of Nemaslug®, and
these were placed together in an intraspecific monophyletic clade with high
support in maximum likelihood and Bayesian analyses. We also examined bacteria
that co-cultured with the nematode strains isolated in Oregon, USA, by analyzing 
16S rRNA sequences. Eight different bacterial genera were found to associate with
these nematodes, though Moraxella osloensis, the bacteria species used in the
Nemaslug® formulation, was not detected. This study provided evidence that
nematodes deriving from the Nemaslug® biocontrol product have invaded countries
where its use is prohibited by regulatory agencies and not commercially
available.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237249 
PMCID: PMC7430733
PMID: 32804938 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist

