
1. Harefuah. 2020 Mar;159(3):163-165.

[MORAXELLA OSLOENSIS BACTEREMIA WITH PNEUMONIA: FIRST REPORTED CASE IN ISRAEL].

[Article in Hebrew]

Bilyk V(1), Ali O(1), Moghrabi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Galilee Medical Center, Department of Internal Medicine "D", Nahariya.

INTRODUCTION: Community acquired pneumonia (CAP), an acute infection of the
pulmonary parenchyma acquired in the community, is generally treated in an
outpatient setting and involves different etiological agents. In the adult
community, the most common pathogen in the disease is Streptococcus pneumonia,
though other multiple etiological agents (atypical) have been involved, including
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila. The 
genus Moraxella consists of aerobic, oxidase-positive gram-negative coccobacilli.
Moraxella catarrhalis is known to be a common inhabitant of the upper respiratory
tract and has been implicated as an etiologic agent in multiple diseases of the
respiratory tract (but not limited to), such as bronchitis, pneumonia, otitis
media, and sinusitis. The species Moraxella osloensis is a gram-negative
opportunistic human pathogen, which has been found to cause several human
diseases and infections such as meningitis, vaginitis, sinusitis, bacteremia,
endocarditis, and septic arthritis. However, due to the subject's rarity, there
is a paucity of information in the medical literature regarding its clinical
significance, epidemiological data and appropriate therapy. We present the first 
case reported in Israel of Moraxella osloensis bacteremia in a patient with
multiple co-morbidities including C. difficile infection (CDI) carrier state
which presented with clinical symptoms (supported by radiological features) of
community-acquired pneumonia. The patient was initially treated with empiric
antibiotics including a 3rd generation cephalosporin and a macrolide that were
substituted with IV Augmentin (Amoxicillin-Clavulanic acid) according to the
organism's sensitivity tests. Our patient showed remarkable clinical and
laboratory improvement with the therapy mentioned above.


PMID: 32186784  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

