
1. BMC Genomics. 2020 Aug 24;21(1):579. doi: 10.1186/s12864-020-07001-2.

Sequencing of five poultry strains elucidates phylogenetic relationships and
divergence in virulence genes in Morganella morganii.

Palmieri N(1), Hess C(1), Hess M(1), Alispahic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, Department for Farm Animals and
Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinärplatz 1,
1210, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Clinic for Poultry and Fish Medicine, Department for Farm Animals and
Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine, Veterinärplatz 1,
1210, Vienna, Austria. merima.alispahic@vetmeduni.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: M. morganii is a bacterium frequently associated with urinary
infections in humans. While many human strains are sequenced, only the genomes of
few poultry strains are available. Here, we performed a detailed characterization
of five highly resistant Morganella morganii strains isolated in association with
Escherichia coli from diseased domestic Austrian poultry flocks, namely geese,
turkeys and chicken layers. Additionally, we sequenced the genomes of these
strains by NGS and analyzed phylogenetic clustering, resistance and virulence
genes in the context of host-specificity.
RESULTS: Two strains were identified to be Extended Spectrum Beta Lactamase
(ESBL) and one as AmpC beta-lactamases (AMP-C) phenotype, while two were ESBL
negative. By integrating the genome sequences of these five poultry strains with 
all the available M. morganii genomes, we constructed a phylogenetic tree that
clearly separates the Morganella genus into two clusters (M1 and M2), which
approximately reflect the proposed subspecies classification (morganii and
sibonii). Additionally, we found no association between phylogenetic structure
and host, suggesting interspecies transmission. All five poultry strains
contained genes for resistance to aminocoumarins, beta-lactams, colistin,
elfamycins, fluoroquinolones, phenicol, rifampin and tetracycline. A comparative 
genomics analysis of virulence genes showed acquisition of novel virulence genes 
involved in secretion system and adherence in cluster M2. We showed that some of 
these genes were acquired by horizontal gene transfer from closely related
Morganellaceae species and propose that novel virulence genes could be
responsible for expansion of tissue tropism in M. morganii. Finally, we detected 
variability in copy number and high sequence divergence in toxin genes and
provided evidence for positive selection in insecticidal toxins genes, likely
reflecting host-related adaptations.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, this study describes i) the first isolation and
characterization of M. morganii from goose and turkey, ii) a large-scale genetic 
analysis of M. morganii and an attempt to generate a global picture of the M.
morganii intraspecific phylogenetic structure.

DOI: 10.1186/s12864-020-07001-2 
PMCID: PMC7446228
PMID: 32831012 

