
1. Vet Med Sci. 2020 Sep 16. doi: 10.1002/vms3.358. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of potential superspreader farms for bovine tuberculosis: A
review.

Fielding HR(1), McKinley TJ(2), Delahay RJ(3), Silk MJ(1), McDonald RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environment and Sustainability Institute, University of Exeter, Penryn,
Cornwall, UK.
(2)College of Medicine and Health, University of Exeter, Exeter, Devon, UK.
(3)National Wildlife Management Centre, Animal and Plant Health Agency,
Stonehouse, Gloucestershire, UK.

BACKGROUND: Variation in host attributes that influence their contact rates and
infectiousness can lead some individuals to make disproportionate contributions
to the spread of infections. Understanding the roles of such 'superspreaders' can
be crucial in deciding where to direct disease surveillance and controls to
greatest effect. In the epidemiology of bovine tuberculosis (bTB) in Great
Britain, it has been suggested that a minority of cattle farms or herds might
make disproportionate contributions to the spread of Mycobacterium bovis, and
hence might be considered 'superspreader farms'.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: We review the literature to identify the characteristics 
of farms that have the potential to contribute to exceptional values in the three
main components of the farm reproductive number - Rf : contact rate,
infectiousness and duration of infectiousness, and therefore might characterize
potential superspreader farms for bovine tuberculosis in Great Britain.
RESULTS: Farms exhibit marked heterogeneity in contact rates arising from
between-farm trading of cattle. A minority of farms act as trading hubs that
greatly augment connections within cattle trading networks. Herd infectiousness
might be increased by high within-herd transmission or the presence of
supershedding individuals, or infectiousness might be prolonged due to undetected
infections or by repeated local transmission, via wildlife or fomites.
CONCLUSIONS: Targeting control methods on putative superspreader farms might
yield disproportionate benefits in controlling endemic bovine tuberculosis in
Great Britain. However, real-time identification of any such farms, and
integration of controls with industry practices, present analytical, operational 
and policy challenges.

© 2020 The Authors. Veterinary Medicine and Science published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/vms3.358 
PMID: 32937038 

