
1. J Infect. 2020 Sep 29. pii: S0163-4453(20)30631-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jinf.2020.09.032. [Epub ahead of print]

Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific cytokine biomarkers to differentiate active
TB and LTBI: A systematic review.

Sudbury EL(1), Clifford V(2), Messina NL(3), Song R(4), Curtis N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; 
Infectious Diseases Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Australia. Electronic address: eva.sudbury@student.unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; 
Infectious Diseases Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Australia; Infectious Diseases Unit, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Parkville, Australia. Electronic address: vanessa.clifford@rch.org.au.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; 
Infectious Diseases Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Australia. Electronic address: nicole.messina@mcri.edu.au.
(4)Oxford Vaccine Group, Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford and the 
National Institute for Health Research Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford,
UK; Division of Infectious Diseases, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic
address: rinn.song@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; 
Infectious Diseases Research Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, Australia; Infectious Diseases Unit, The Royal Children's Hospital,
Parkville, Australia. Electronic address: nigel.curtis@rch.org.au.

OBJECTIVES: New tests are needed to overcome the limitations of existing
immunodiagnostic tests for tuberculosis (TB) infection, including their inability
to differentiate between active TB and latent TB infection (LTBI). This review
aimed to identify the most promising cytokine biomarkers for use as
stage-specific markers of TB infection.
METHODS: A systematic review was done using electronic databases to identify
studies that have investigated Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)-specific cytokine
responses as diagnostic tools to differentiate between LTBI and active TB.
RESULTS: The 56 studies included in this systematic review measured the
MTB-specific responses of 100 cytokines, the most frequently studied of which
were IFN-γ, IL-2, TNF-α, IP-10, IL-10 and IL-13. Ten studies assessed
combinations of cytokines, most commonly IL-2 and IFN-γ. For most cytokines,
findings were heterogenous between studies. The variation in results likely
relates to differences in the study design and laboratory methods, as well as
participant and environmental factors.
CONCLUSIONS: Although several cytokines show promise as stage-specific markers of
TB infection, this review highlights the need for further well-designed studies, 
in both adult and paediatric populations, to establish which cytokine(s) will be 
of most use in a new generation of immunodiagnostic tests.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2020.09.032 
PMID: 33007340 

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of Competing Interest None.

