
1. Eur Respir J. 2020 Jul 7;56(1). pii: 2000535. doi: 10.1183/13993003.00535-2020.
Print 2020 Jul.

Treatment of nontuberculous mycobacterial pulmonary disease: an official
ATS/ERS/ESCMID/IDSA clinical practice guideline.

Daley CL(1)(2)(3), Iaccarino JM(4), Lange C(5)(6)(7)(8)(3), Cambau E(9)(3),
Wallace RJ Jr(10)(3), Andrejak C(11)(12), Böttger EC(13), Brozek J(14), Griffith 
DE(15), Guglielmetti L(9)(16), Huitt GA(1)(2), Knight SL(17), Leitman P(18),
Marras TK(19), Olivier KN(20), Santin M(21), Stout JE(22), Tortoli E(23), van
Ingen J(24), Wagner D(25), Winthrop KL(26).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(2)Dept of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)C.L. Daley, C. Lange, E. Cambau and R.J. Wallace Jr are cochairs of this
guideline committee.
(4)Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Division of Clinical Infectious Diseases, Research Center Borstel, Borstel,
Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Clinical Tuberculosis Unit,
Borstel, Germany.
(7)Respiratory Medicine and International Health, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany.
(8)Dept of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(9)National Reference Center for Mycobacteria and Antimycobacterial Resistance,
APHP -Hôpital Lariboisière, Bacteriology; Inserm, University Paris Diderot, IAME 
UMR1137, Paris, France.
(10)Mycobacteria/Nocardia Laboratory, Dept of Microbiology, The University of
Texas Health Science Center, Tyler, TX, USA.
(11)Respiratory and Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Amiens, Amiens,
France.
(12)EA 4294, AGIR, Jules Verne Picardy University, Amiens, France.
(13)Institute of Medical Microbiology, National Reference Center for
Mycobacteria, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(14)Dept of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, McMaster University Health
Sciences Centre, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(15)Pulmonary Infectious Disease Section, University of Texas Health Science
Center, Tyler, TX, USA.
(16)Team E13 (Bactériologie), Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, 
Sorbonne Université, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Université Paris 06,
Centre de Recherche 7, INSERM, IAME UMR1137, Paris, France.
(17)Library and Knowledge Services, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(18)NTM Info and Research, Miami, FL, USA.
(19)Dept of Medicine, University of Toronto and University Health Network,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(20)Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA.
(21)Service of Infectious Diseases, Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL,
University of Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(22)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(23)Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milan, Italy.
(24)Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, Dept of Medical Microbiology, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(25)Division of Infectious Diseases, Dept of Medicine II, Medical Center -
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(26)Divisions of Infectious Diseases, Schools of Public Health and Medicine,
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, USA.

Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) represent over 190 species and subspecies, some
of which can produce disease in humans of all ages and can affect both pulmonary 
and extrapulmonary sites. This guideline focuses on pulmonary disease in adults
(without cystic fibrosis or human immunodeficiency virus infection) caused by the
most common NTM pathogens such as Mycobacterium avium complex, Mycobacterium
kansasii, and Mycobacterium xenopi among the slowly growing NTM and Mycobacterium
abscessus among the rapidly growing NTM. A panel of experts was carefully
selected by leading international respiratory medicine and infectious diseases
societies (ATS, ERS, ESCMID, IDSA) and included specialists in pulmonary
medicine, infectious diseases and clinical microbiology, laboratory medicine, and
patient advocacy. Systematic reviews were conducted around each of 22 PICO
(Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome) questions and the recommendations
were formulated, written, and graded using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) approach. Thirty-one evidence-based
recommendations about treatment of NTM pulmonary disease are provided. This
guideline is intended for use by healthcare professionals who care for patients
with NTM pulmonary disease, including specialists in infectious diseases and
pulmonary diseases.

Copyright © The Author(s) 2020. This version published by the European
Respiratory Society in the European Respiratory Journal, and jointly with
Clinical Infectious Diseases. The articles are identical except for minor
stylistic and spelling differences in keeping with each journal's style. Either
citation can be used when citing this article.

DOI: 10.1183/13993003.00535-2020 
PMID: 32636299 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: C.L. Daley served on
advisory committees for Cipla, Horizon, Insmed, Johnson & Johnson, Matinas
Biopharma, Otsuka America Pharmaceutical, Paratek, and Spero; received research
support from Beyond Air, Insmed, and Spero; served as a consultant for Meiji.
Conflict of interest: J.M. Iaccarino has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: C. Lange served as a speaker for Berlin Chemie, Chiesi, Gilead,
Janssen, Lucane, and Novartis; served on an advisory committee for Oxford
Immunotec. Conflict of interest: E. Cambau has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: R.J. Wallace Jr served as the director of a university clinical
laboratory that does NTM identification, molecular strain comparison, and
susceptibility testing; received research support from Insmed as mycobacterial
reference laboratory for a trial of the inhaled liposomal amikacin. Conflict of
interest: C. Andrejak received research support from Insmed. Conflict of
interest: E.C. Böttger served as a consultant for AID Diagnostika, Becton
Dickinson, and COPAN; provided expert testimony for Shuttleworth & Ingersoll law 
firm. Conflict of interest: J. Brozek has nothing to disclose. Conflict of
interest: D.E. Griffith served on an advisory committee, as a consultant, as a
speaker and received research support from Insmed; served as a consultant for
Johnson & Johnson, Merck, and Spero. Conflict of interest: L. Guglielmetti has
nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: G.A. Huitt served on an advisory
committee for Hill-Rom and Insmed. Conflict of interest: S.L. Knight has nothing 
to disclose. Conflict of interest: P. Leitman served as the president of NTM Info
& Research, Inc, during which time the organization received support from Insmed,
Grifols, BeyondAir, Aradigm, Spero Therapeutics, Johnson & Johnson, Hill-Rom,
International Biophysics, Electromed, RespirTech, Maxor Specialty Pharmacy,
PantherX, and Kroger Specialty Pharmacy. Conflict of interest: T.K. Marras served
as a consultant and received research support from Insmed; served as a speaker
for AstraZeneca and Novartis; served as a consultant for Horizon, Spero, and
RedHill Biopharma. Conflict of interest: K.N. Olivier received research support
from AIT Therapeutics, Insmed, and Matinas Biopharma. Conflict of interest: M.
Santin received personal fees from DiaSorin SPA and Vircell SL. Conflict of
interest: J.E. Stout has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: E. Tortoli
has nothing to disclose. Conflict of interest: J. van Ingen served on an advisory
committee and as a consultant for Insmed; served on advisory committees for
Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Spero. Conflict of interest: D. Wagner served as a
speaker for Cepheid GmbH; received research support and travel expenses from
Insmed. Conflict of interest: K.L. Winthrop served on an advisory committee for
Insmed, Johnson and Johnson, Paratek, Redhill Biopharma, and Spero; served as a
consultant for Bayer Healthcare, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Horizon, Lilly, Pfizer,
and RedHill Biopharma; received research support from Bristol-Myers Squibb,
Cellestis, and Insmed; served on data safety and monitoring boards for Abbvie,
Biomarin, Gilead, Roche, and UCB.

