
1. Prev Vet Med. 2020 Aug 30:105134. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2020.105134. [Epub
ahead of print]

The interpretation of serial Johne's disease milk antibody results is affected by
test characteristics, pattern of test results and parallel bovine tuberculosis
testing.

Barden M(1), Smith RF(2), Higgins HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Livestock and One Health, Institute of Infection, Veterinary and
Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Leahurst Campus, Chester High Road,
Neston, Cheshire, CH64 7TE, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
mbarden@liverpool.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Livestock and One Health, Institute of Infection, Veterinary and
Ecological Sciences, University of Liverpool, Leahurst Campus, Chester High Road,
Neston, Cheshire, CH64 7TE, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: In the UK, quarterly Johne's disease milk antibody ELISAs
(JD-mELISAs) are commonly used to classify animals which are likely to be
infectious, termed "red cows". "Red cows" are classified following two positive
results from the previous four tests (e.g. + - - +). All cattle are also
regularly screened for bovine tuberculosis using intradermal avian and bovine
tuberculin, and it is advised to maintain a 60 day interval between a
tuberculosis test and JD-mELISA.
AIMS: To evaluate the impact of bovine tuberculosis testing on JD-mELISAs, and to
quantify the impact of test specificity and "red cow" classification test pattern
on the probability of infection.
METHODS: Four years of individual cow milk records with JD-mELISA results were
collated from 735 dairy farms and matched to tuberculosis testing records. A
two-level multivariable logistic regression model quantified the effect of
tuberculosis testing on JD-mELISA result. The specificity and age-dependent
sensitivity of a single JD-mELISA were estimated and used to calculate likelihood
ratios following each test. Using Bayes' theorem, the posterior probability of
infection with Johne's disease was calculated for different specificities, ages
of cow, and patterns of test results.
RESULTS: There were increased odds of a positive JD-mELISA if it was ≤30 days
(OR: 2.1) or 31-60 days (OR: 1.2) after a tuberculosis test, compared to >90
days. A larger avian skin reaction at the tuberculosis test was also associated
with increased odds of a positive JD-mELISA. The proportion of cows which tested 
exclusively negative after their first positive JD-mELISA was higher if that
JD-mELISA was ≤30 days after a tuberculosis test compared to >90 days. The
posterior probability of infection reduced substantially when the test
specificity was slightly reduced. In "red cows" classified following two
consecutive positive tests, if the test specificity was reduced to 0.95, then the
posterior probability of infection was only >95 % if the prior probability was
>13 %. If the "red cow" classification was due to two non-consecutive positive
tests (+ - - +), the posterior probability of infection was only >95 % if the
prior probability was >43 %.
CONCLUSIONS: Testing for Johne's disease within 60 days of a tuberculosis test is
associated with a higher chance of a positive JD-mELISA and this may reflect a
reduction in the ELISA specificity. Relatively small reductions in JD-mELISA
specificity can markedly reduce the posterior probability of infection which also
depends on the pattern of test results which classifies "red cows".

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2020.105134 
PMID: 32912605 

