
1. Iran J Vet Res. 2020 Spring;21(2):136-140.

Detection of non-tuberculous mycobacterial species using PCR-RFLP analysis in
trans-tracheal washes in cattle and buffaloes with respiratory distress.

Slathia P(1), Narang D(2), Chandra M(2), Sharma A(3), Narang A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ph.D. Student in Veterinary Microbiology, Department of Veterinary
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science, Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal
Sciences University, Ludhiana-141004, Punjab, India.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science, Guru
Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Ludhiana-141004, Punjab,
India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Science, Guru Angad
Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University, Ludhiana-141004, Punjab, India.

Background: Bovine tuberculosis (bTB) is a chronic disease of cattle with high
economic importance in livestock farming caused by Mycobacterium bovis and bears 
a zoonotic potential. There are some non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) which
cause disease similar to bTB and interfere with diagnosis of bTB. Non-tuberculous
mycobacteria are saprophytic in nature but some of them may cause pulmonary
infections, mastitis, lesions in respiratory tract and lymph nodes of cattle, due
to which they are being recognized worldwide and interfere with the diagnosis of 
bTB.
Aims: The aim of the study was to detect NTM species from cattle and buffaloes
with respiratory distress using biochemical test and polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) analysis (PRA).
Methods: A total of 50 trans-tracheal washes were collected from cattle (n=41)
and buffaloes (n=9) with respiratory distress. The samples were inoculated on
Middlebrook 7H10 media after proper decontamination with 4% NaOH. The isolate
obtained was identified by biochemical testing. Extracted DNA from samples and
isolate was subjected to PRA which involved hsp65 gene amplification (439 bp) and
RFLP analysis of amplified product.
Results: Out of 50 trans-tracheal washes only one isolate of Mycobacterium
kansasii (n=1) (2%) was obtained which was confirmed by biochemical testing and
PRA. Mycobacterium kansasii (n=4) (8%), Mycobacterium intracellulare (n=1) (2%), 
and Mycobacterium vaccae (n=1) (2%) were identified by PRA.
Conclusion: The study emphasizes the importance of NTM in animals. Polymerase
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis is a more
reliable and rapid method for identification of NTM than conventional methods.


PMCID: PMC7430363
PMID: 32849894 

