
1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2020 Jan-Mar;9(1):83-90. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_12_20.

Clinical-epidemiological profile and factors related to the mortality of patients
with nontuberculous mycobacteria isolated at a reference hospital in Ceará,
Northeastern Brazil.

De Lima Mota MA(1), De Melo DM(2), Christyan Nunes Beserra FL(2), Nogueira Filho 
GA(2), Pinto LM(2), Jesus Souza R(2), Silva Sousa SD(2), Mota RS(3), Justa Pires 
Neto RD(4), Jesus Silva Leit TDM(4).

Author information: 
(1)São José Hospital of Infectious Diseases; Health Sciences Center, School of
Medicine, University of Fortaleza, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.
(2)Department of Community Health, School of Medicine, Federal University of
Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.
(3)Department of Statistics and Applied Mathematics, Federal University of Ceará,
Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.
(4)São José Hospital of Infectious Diseases; Department of Community Health,
School of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.

Background: There is a significant shortage of official records that enable
estimating the real prevalence of nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) infections in
Brazil. The study aims to investigate the clinical, laboratory, and
epidemiological aspects of patients with NTM isolation at an infectious diseases 
reference hospital, and to identify factors associated with mortality.
Methods: This was an observational study in which clinical, epidemiological, and 
laboratory aspects were evaluated in patients with NTM isolated at care in
Hospital São José, located in Northeastern Brazil, from 2005 to 2016. The records
of the reference laboratory for NTM isolates were searched from the culture
results of patients. Afterward, the medical records of the patients were
reviewed. The analytical assessment was conducted by the Mann-Whitney and
Fisher's exact test. The adopted level of significance was 5%.
Results: A total of 69 patients were described, with a predominance of males
(73.9%). The main clinical forms identified were: pulmonary (60.9%) and
disseminated (27.5%). The most frequently NTM identified were Mycobacterium avium
(24.6%) and Mycobacterium fortuitum (10.1%). Forty-eight (69.6%) patients had HIV
infection. The mortality was 24.6%, and the risk factors for deaths identified
were: origin from outside the metropolitan region; weight loss; HIV infection;
anemia; hyperbilirubinemia; increased serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase,
alkaline phosphatase, lactate dehydrogenase; and impaired renal function. Among
the patients with HIV, the main changes related to death were: lower counts of
CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes.
Conclusion: Maintaining constant vigilance regarding the possibility of NTM
infection is required, namely in patients co-infected with HIV/AIDS.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_12_20 
PMID: 32474494 

Conflict of interest statement: None

