
1. Rev Med Virol. 2020 Sep 24:e2151. doi: 10.1002/rmv.2151. [Epub ahead of print]

Does bacillus Calmette-Guérin vaccine prevent herpes simplex virus recurrences? A
systematic review.

Pittet LF(1)(2), Curtis N(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Infectious Diseases Group, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

Recurrent infections with herpes simplex virus (HSV) in the orofacial (cold
sores), ocular or genital region are common and sometimes disabling, calling for 
an effective preventive intervention. The bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine 
has beneficial off-target effects that might impact recurrence of HSV infections.
In this systematic review, Medline, EMBASE, and PubMed were searched in June
2020; 16 articles were deemed relevant comprising eight animal and eight human
studies (301 patients). In animals, BCG administration led to a 1.9 to 5.5-fold
increase in survival rate following HSV challenge (vaginal, corneal, or
intraperitoneal inoculation). This beneficial effect was influenced by the dose
of BCG (higher better), mode of administration (intradermal better than
intraperitoneal), and the interval between vaccination and viral challenge (at
least 6 days required). In nonrandomized human studies (that failed to control
for a placebo effect), BCG vaccination appeared beneficial in 78% of adults with 
recurrent herpes genitalis or labialis, with 37% being recurrence-free for an
extended period, 41% experiencing less frequent or severe episodes, and only 22% 
reporting no change. This clinical benefit is consistent with the findings of
immunological sub-studies. In the two studies restricted to recurrent herpes
labialis, 94% appeared to benefit from BCG. The one randomized controlled trial
used an intervention in the control group that has immunomodulatory effects thus 
limiting interpretation. In conclusion, BCG vaccine is a potential, safe,
affordable and readily available candidate intervention to decrease the high
burden of disease associated with HSV infection and recurrences, but properly
controlled randomized trials are required.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/rmv.2151 
PMID: 32975011 

