
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2020 Sep 28;9(9):e1176. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1176.
eCollection 2020.

Disease extent and anti-tubercular treatment response correlates with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific CD4 T-cell phenotype regardless of HIV-1
status.

Riou C(1)(2), Du Bruyn E(1), Ruzive S(1), Goliath RT(1), Lindestam Arlehamn
CS(3), Sette A(3)(4), Sher A(5), Barber DL(6), Wilkinson RJ(1)(7)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Africa Institute of
Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine University of Cape Town Observatory
South Africa.
(2)Division of Immunology Department of Pathology University of Cape Town
Observatory South Africa.
(3)Division of Vaccine Discovery La Jolla Institute for Immunology La Jolla CA
USA.
(4)Department of Medicine University of California San Diego La Jolla CA USA.
(5)Immunobiology Section Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health Bethesda MD USA.
(6)T Lymphocyte Biology Section Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases National Institutes of Health
Bethesda MD USA.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases Imperial College London London UK.
(8)Department of Medicine University of Cape Town Observatory South Africa.
(9)The Francis Crick Institute London UK.

Objectives: The development of non-sputum-based assays for tuberculosis (TB)
diagnosis and treatment monitoring is a key priority. Recent data indicate that
whole blood-based assays to assess the phenotype of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
(Mtb)-specific CD4 T cells hold promise for this purpose and require further
investigation in well-characterised TB cohorts. In this study, we investigated
the relationship between the phenotypic signature of Mtb-specific CD4 responses, 
TB disease extent and treatment response.
Methods: Using flow cytometry, we measured the expression of phenotypic and
functional markers (HLA-DR, CD27, CD153, KLRG1, IL-2, MIP-1β, TNF-α and IFN-γ) on
Mtb-specific CD4 T-cells in whole blood from 161 participants of varying TB and
HIV status. TB disease extent was graded as a continuum using the Xpertct value, 
C-reactive protein, Timika radiographic score and monocyte/lymphocyte ratio.
Results: The phenotypic profile of Mtb-specific CD4 T cells pre-anti-tubercular
treatment (ATT) strongly correlated with disease extent, irrespective of HIV
status. ATT associated with major changes in the phenotype of Mtb-specific CD4 T 
cells, with decreased expression of HLA-DR and increased CD27 and CD153
expression. Principal component analysis showed an almost complete separation
between latent TB infection (LTBI) and active TB (aTB) pre-ATT groups, whereas
the profile of the aTB post-ATT group overlapped with the LTBI group. However, in
patients experiencing treatment failure or relapse, no significant changes were
observed in Mtb-specific CD4 T-cell phenotype pre- and post-ATT.
Conclusion: Whole blood-based assays of Mtb-specific CD4 T-cell activation and
maturation markers can be used as non-sputum-based biomarkers of disease extent
and treatment monitoring in TB, regardless of HIV-1 status.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1176 
PMCID: PMC7520805
PMID: 33005414 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

