
1. Int J Infect Dis. 2020 Sep 22. pii: S1201-9712(20)32135-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijid.2020.09.1419. [Epub ahead of print]

A Case of Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) strain Meningitis
and Ventriculitis Following BCG Vaccination.

Furuichi M(1), Mori F(2), Uejima Y(3), Sato S(4), Kurihara J(5), Kawano Y(6),
Suganuma E(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, and Allergy, Saitama
Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address:
furuichi.mihoko@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(2)Division of Neurosurgery, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
Electronic address: mori.fumi@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, and Allergy, Saitama
Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address:
uejima.yoji@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, and Allergy, Saitama
Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address:
sato.satoshi@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(5)Division of Neurosurgery, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
Electronic address: kurihara.jun@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, and Allergy, Saitama
Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address:
kawano.yutaka@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, and Allergy, Saitama
Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan. Electronic address:
suganuma.eisuke@scmc.pref.saitama.jp.

The Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccine is widely used worldwide. Intracranial
manifestation as an adverse event of BCG is extremely rare. A previously healthy 
16-month-old boy was referred to our hospital for difficulties in eye contact and
progressive gait disturbance lasting 2 months. He was inoculated with BCG at 7
months of age. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed hydrocephalus with
widespread and disseminated enhancement lesions with thickening of the third
ventricle floor, and brain tissue pathologically showed noncaseous granulomatous 
inflammation. Immunosuppressive therapies were initiated because of a provisional
diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis. Three months later, a positive polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) result for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex was obtained.
Eventually, M. bovis (BCG Tokyo 172 strain) was identified in the cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and shunt tube culture. The prolonged use of antituberculosis drugs
and multiple shunt replacement surgeries were needed for recovery. There was no
evidence of immunodeficiency. Unfortunately, he had severe neurological sequelae 
such as bilateral blindness and neurodevelopmental delay. Our purpose of this
report was to highlight the potential for intracranial manifestations of adverse 
reactions related to BCG vaccination. We propose that CSF PCR assay of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) complex should be applied repeatedly in children
suspected intractable neurosarcoidosis, with a history of BCG vaccination.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.09.1419 
PMID: 32976992 

