
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2020 Sep 16. pii: JCM.01813-20. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01813-20.
[Epub ahead of print]

Antimicrobial susceptibility and phylogenetic relations in a German cohort
infected with Mycobacterium abscessus.

Wetzstein N(1)(2), Kohl TA(3)(4)(5), Schultze TG(2)(6)(7), Andres S(5),
Bellinghausen C(8), Hügel C(8), Kempf VAJ(2)(6)(7), Lehn A(9), Hogardt
M(2)(6)(7)(10), Serve H(11), Vehreschild MJGT(12)(2), Wolf T(12)(2), Niemann
S(3)(4)(5), Maurer FP(5)(13), Wichelhaus TA(14)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. nils.wetzstein@kgu.de.
(2)University Center of Infectious Diseases, UCI, University Hospital Frankfurt, 
Goethe University, Germany.
(3)German Center for Infection Research, Research Center Borstel, Borstel,
Germany.
(4)Molecular and Experimental Mycobacteriology, Research Center Borstel, Borstel,
Germany.
(5)National and WHO Supranational Reference Center for Mycobacteria, Research
Center Borstel, Borstel, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(7)University Center of Competence of Infection Control of the State of Hesse,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(8)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(9)Institute of Biostatistics and Mathematical Modeling, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(10)National Consiliary Laboratory on Cystic Fibrosis Bacteriology, Germany.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Infectious Diseases, University Hospital
Frankfurt, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(13)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hospital Hygiene, University 
Medical Center Hamburg- Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(14)University Center of Infectious Diseases, UCI, University Hospital Frankfurt,
Goethe University, Germany. ThomasA.Wichelhaus@kgu.de.

Background: M. abscessus (Mab) is a highly antibiotic resistant opportunistic
pathogen causing clinically challenging infections in patients with preexisting
lung diseases or under immunosuppression. Hence, reliable antibiotic
susceptibility data is required for effective treatment. Aims of this study were 
to investigate (i) the congruence of genotypic and phenotypic antimicrobial
susceptibility testing, (ii) the relationship between resistance profile and
clinical course, as well as (iii) the phylogenetic relations of Mab in a German
patient cohort.Materials/methods: A total of 39 isolates from 29 patients
infected or colonized with Mab underwent genotypic and phenotypic drug
susceptibility testing. Clinical data were correlated to susceptibility data.
Phylogenetic analysis was performed by means of whole genome sequencing (WGS) and
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis.Results: Macrolide resistance was
mainly mediated by functional Erm (41) methyltransferases (T28 sequevars) in M.
abscessus subsp. abscessus (n=25) and M. abscessus subsp. bolletii (n=2). It was 
significantly associated with impaired culture conversion (p=0.02). According to 
the core SNP phylogeny, we identified three clusters of closely related isolates 
with SNP distances below 25. Representatives of all circulating global clones
(Absc. 1, Absc. 2 and Mass. 1) were identified in our cohort. However, we could
not determine evidence for in-hospital interhuman transmission from clinical
data.Conclusions: In our patient cohort, we identified three Mab clusters with
closely related isolates and representatives of the previously described
international clusters, but no human-to-human in-hospital transmission. Macrolide
and aminoglycoside susceptibility data are critical for therapeutic
decision-making in Mab infections.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01813-20 
PMID: 32938741 

