
1. Transpl Infect Dis. 2020 Oct 4:e13482. doi: 10.1111/tid.13482. [Epub ahead of
print]

A case of tuberculosis meningitis after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for relapsed Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Yang J(1), Moon S(1), Kwon M(2), Huh K(3), Jung CW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We report a case of tuberculosis (TB) meningitis after allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation (HSCT) for relapsed acute myeloid leukemia. The patient
was 52-year-old female who had relapsed leukemia with a remission duration of
seven months, and she received re-induction with consolidation, allogeneic HSCT. 
After 4 days of engraftment, she had headache with fever and cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) analysis presented increased intracerebral pressure, white blood cell
counts with dominant neutrophils, elevated glucose and protein level. Brain
imaging showed diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement with scattered miliary TB
lesions suggesting disseminated TB disease. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was
detected in CSF and sputum anti-TB medication was started. She was IGRA positive 
before transplantation but did not receive treatment for LTBI prior or during the
transplant. Unfortunately, she expired because of intracerebral hemorrhage. TB
meningitis is a rare but important complication of HSCT as it can cause serious
neurologic sequelae, even death. So in transplant recipients having high risk of 
TB reactivation, LTBI treatment is recommended before or along with
transplantation. If latent TB is not treated, vigilant suspicion and early
diagnosis of TB meningitis could improve the transplant outcome.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/tid.13482 
PMID: 33012077 

