
1. Proteins. 2020 Aug 28. doi: 10.1002/prot.25997. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural analysis of the N-acetyltransferase Eis1 from Mycobacterium abscessus 
reveals the molecular determinants of its incapacity to modify aminoglycosides.

Ung KL(1), Kremer L(1)(2), Blaise M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier (IRIM), Université de
Montpellier, CNRS UMR, Montpellier, France.
(2)INSERM, IRIM, Montpellier, France.

Enhanced intracellular survival (Eis) proteins belonging to the superfamily of
the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferases play important functions in mycobacterial
pathogenesis. In Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Eis enhances the intracellular
survival of the bacilli in macrophages by modulating the host immune response and
is capable to chemically modify and inactivate aminoglycosides. In nontuberculous
mycobacteria (NTM), Eis shares similar functions. However, Mycobacterium
abscessus, a multidrug resistant NTM, possesses two functionally distinct Eis
homologues, Eis1Mab and Eis2Mab . While Eis2Mab participates in virulence and
aminoglycosides resistance, this is not the case for Eis1Mab, whose exact
biological function remains to be determined. Herein, we show that overexpression
of Eis1Mab in M. abscessus fails to induce resistance to aminoglycosides. To
clarify why Eis1Mab is unable to modify this class of antibiotics, we solved its 
crystal structure bound to its cofactor, acetyl-CoA. The structure revealed that 
Eis1Mab has a typical homohexameric Eis-like organization. The structural
analysis supported by biochemical approaches demonstrated that while Eis1Mab can 
acetylate small substrates, its active site is too narrow to accommodate
aminoglycosides. Comparison with other Eis structures showed that an extended
loop between strands 9 and 10 is blocking the access of large substrates to the
active site and movement of helices 4 and 5 reduces the volume of the
substrate-binding pocket to these compounds in Eis1Mab . Overall, this study
underscores the molecular determinants explaining functional differences between 
Eis1Mab and Eis2Mab, especially those inherent to their capacity to modify
aminoglycosides.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/prot.25997 
PMID: 32860271 

