
1. Brief Bioinform. 2020 Oct 3. pii: bbaa246. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbaa246. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Capacity building for whole genome sequencing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
bioinformatics in high TB burden countries.

Rivière E(1), Heupink TH(1), Ismail N(2), Dippenaar A(1), Clarke C(2), Abebe
G(3), Heusden P(4), Warren R(5), Meehan CJ(6), Van Rie A(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of Antwerp.
(2)Stellenbosch University.
(3)Mycobacteriology Research Center in Jimma, Ethiopia.
(4)South African National Bioinformatics Institute (SANBI).
(5)SAMRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research.
(6)University of Bradford.
(7)Tuberculosis Omics Research Consortium.

BACKGROUND: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is increasingly used for Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis (Mtb) research. Countries with the highest tuberculosis (TB) burden 
face important challenges to integrate WGS into surveillance and research.
METHODS: We assessed the global status of Mtb WGS and developed a 3-week training
course coupled with long-term mentoring and WGS infrastructure building. Training
focused on genome sequencing, bioinformatics and development of a locally
relevant WGS research project. The aim of the long-term mentoring was to support 
trainees in project implementation and funding acquisition. The focus of WGS
infrastructure building was on the DNA extraction process and bioinformatics.
FINDINGS: Compared to their TB burden, Asia and Africa are grossly
underrepresented in Mtb WGS research. Challenges faced resulted in adaptations to
the training, mentoring and infrastructure building. Out-of-date laptop hardware 
and operating systems were overcome by using online tools and a Galaxy WGS
analysis pipeline. A case studies approach created a safe atmosphere for students
to formulate and defend opinions. Because quality DNA extraction is paramount for
WGS, a biosafety level 3 and general laboratory skill training session were
added, use of commercial DNA extraction kits was introduced and a 2-week training
in a highly equipped laboratory was combined with a 1-week training in the local 
setting.
INTERPRETATION: By developing and sharing the components of and experiences with 
a sequencing and bioinformatics training program, we hope to stimulate capacity
building programs for Mtb WGS and empower high-burden countries to play an
important role in WGS-based TB surveillance and research.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbaa246 
PMID: 33009560 

