
1. Int J Mol Sci. 2020 Sep 16;21(18). pii: E6793. doi: 10.3390/ijms21186793.

Alternative and Experimental Therapies of Mycobacterium abscessus Infections.

Meir M(1), Barkan D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Infectious Diseases Unit, The Ruth Rappaport Children's Hospital,
Rambam Health-Care Campus, Haifa 31096, Israel.
(2)Koret School of Veterinary Medicine, The Robert H. Smith Faculty of
Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Mycobacterium abscessus is a non-tuberculous mycobacterium notoriously known for 
causing severe, chronic infections. Treatment of these infections is challenging 
due to either intrinsic or acquired resistance of M. abscessus to multiple
antibiotics. Despite prolonged poly-antimicrobial therapy, treatment of M.
abscessus infections often fails, leading to progressive morbidity and eventual
mortality. Great research efforts are invested in finding new therapeutic options
for M. abscessus. Clofazimine and rifabutin are known anti-mycobacterial
antibiotics, repurposed for use against M. abscessus. Novel antimicrobials active
against M. abscessus include delamanid, pretomanid and PIPD1 and the recently
approved beta-lactamase inhibitors avibactam, relebactam and vaborbactam.
Previously unused antimicrobial combinations, e.g. vancomycin-clarithromycin and 
dual beta-lactam therapy, have been shown to have synergistic effect against M.
abscessus in experimental models, suggesting their possible use in multiple-drug 
regimens. Finally, engineered phage therapy has been reported to be clinically
successful in a severe case of disseminated M. abscessus infection. While many of
these experimental therapeutics have shown activity against M. abscessus in
vitro, as well as in intracellular and/or animal models, most have little if any 
evidence of effect in human infections. Clinical studies of M. abscesssus
treatments are needed to reliably determine the value of their incorporation in
therapeutic regimens.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms21186793 
PMID: 32948001 

