
1. Pharmaceutics. 2020 Sep 22;12(9). pii: E900. doi: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12090900.

Optimisation of Mycobacterium bovis BCG Fermentation and Storage Survival.

Pascoe J(1), Hendon-Dunn CL(1), Birch CPD(2), Williams GA(3), Chambers MA(3)(4), 
Bacon J(1).

Author information: 
(1)TB Research Group, Public Health England, National Infection Service, Porton
Down, Salisbury, Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.
(2)Department of Epidemiological Sciences, Animal and Plant Health Agency,
Woodham Lane, New Haw, Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, Animal and Plant Health Agency, Woodham Lane, New 
Haw, Addlestone, Surrey KT15 3NB, UK.
(4)Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford,
Surrey GU2 7XH, UK.

Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (M. bovis BCG) was generated over a 
century ago for protection against Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) and is one
the oldest vaccines still in use. The BCG vaccine is currently produced using a
pellicle growth method, which is a complex and lengthy process that has been
challenging to standardise. Fermentation for BCG vaccine production would reduce 
the complexity associated with pellicle growth and increase batch to batch
reproducibility. This more standardised growth lends itself to quantification of 
the total number of bacilli in the BCG vaccine by alternative approaches, such as
flow cytometry, which can also provide information about the metabolic status of 
the bacterial population. The aim of the work reported here was to determine
which batch fermentation conditions and storage conditions give the most
favourable outcomes in terms of the yield and stability of live M. bovis BCG
Danish bacilli. We compared different media and assessed growth over time in
culture, using total viable counts, total bacterial counts, and turbidity
throughout culture. We applied fluorescent viability dyes and flow cytometry to
measure real-time within-culture viability. Culture samples were stored in
different cryoprotectants at different temperatures to assess the effect of these
combined conditions on bacterial titres. Roisin's minimal medium and Middlebrook 
7H9 medium gave comparable, high titres in fermenters. Flow cytometry proved to
be a useful tool for enumeration of total bacterial counts and in the assessment 
of within-culture cell viability and cell death. Of the cryoprotectants
evaluated, 5% (v/v) DMSO showed the most significant positive effect on survival 
and reduced the negative effects of low temperature storage on M. bovis BCG
Danish viability. In conclusion, we have shown a reproducible, more standardised 
approach for the production, evaluation, and storage of high titre, viable, BCG
vaccine.

DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics12090900 
PMID: 32971826 

