
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Aug 14;71(4):e1-e36. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa241.

Treatment of Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Pulmonary Disease: An Official
ATS/ERS/ESCMID/IDSA Clinical Practice Guideline: Executive Summary.

Daley CL(1)(2), Iaccarino JM(3), Lange C(4)(5)(6)(7), Cambau E(8), Wallace RJ(9),
Andrejak C(10)(11), Böttger EC(12), Brozek J(13), Griffith DE(14), Guglielmetti
L(8)(15), Huitt GA(1)(2), Knight SL(16), Leitman P(17), Marras TK(18), Olivier
KN(19), Santin M(20), Stout JE(21), Tortoli E(22), van Ingen J(23), Wagner D(24),
Winthrop KL(25).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.
(3)Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.
(4)Division of Clinical Infectious Diseases, Research Center Borstel, Borstel,
Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Clinical Tuberculosis Unit,
Borstel, Germany.
(6)Respiratory Medicine & International Health, University of Lübeck, Lübeck,
Germany.
(7)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(8)National Reference Center for Mycobacteria and Antimycobacterial Resistance,
APHP -Hôpital Lariboisière, Bacteriology; Inserm, University Paris Diderot, IAME 
UMR1137, Paris, France.
(9)Mycobacteria/Nocardia Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, The University
of Texas Health Science Center, Tyler, Texas, USA.
(10)Respiratory and Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Amiens, Amiens,
France.
(11)EA 4294, AGIR, Jules Verne Picardy University, Amiens, France.
(12)Institute of Medical Microbiology, National Reference Center for
Mycobacteria, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(13)Department of Clinical Epidemiology & Biostatistics, McMaster University
Health Sciences Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Pulmonary Infectious Disease Section, University of Texas Health Science
Center, Tyler, Texas, USA.
(15)Team E13 (Bactériologie), Centre d'Immunologie et des Maladies Infectieuses, 
Sorbonne Université, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Université Paris 06,
Centre de Recherche 7, INSERM, IAME UMR1137, Paris, France.
(16)Library and Knowledge Services, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colorado,
USA.
(17)NTM Info & Research, Miami, Florida, USA.
(18)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto and University Health Network, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(19)Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland, USA.
(20)Service of Infectious Diseases, Bellvitge University Hospital-IDIBELL,
University of Barcelona, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(22)Emerging Bacterial Pathogens Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milan, Italy.
(23)Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(24)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine II, Medical Center - 
University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.
(25)Divisions of Infectious Diseases, Schools of Public Health and Medicine,
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) represent over 190 species and subspecies, some
of which can produce disease in humans of all ages and can affect both pulmonary 
and extrapulmonary sites. This guideline focuses on pulmonary disease in adults
(without cystic fibrosis or human immunodeficiency virus infection) caused by the
most common NTM pathogens such as Mycobacterium avium complex, Mycobacterium
kansasii, and Mycobacterium xenopi among the slowly growing NTM and Mycobacterium
abscessus among the rapidly growing NTM. A panel of experts was carefully
selected by leading international respiratory medicine and infectious diseases
societies (ATS, ERS, ESCMID, IDSA) and included specialists in pulmonary
medicine, infectious diseases and clinical microbiology, laboratory medicine, and
patient advocacy. Systematic reviews were conducted around each of 22 PICO
(Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome) questions and the recommendations
were formulated, written, and graded using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) approach. Thirty-one evidence-based
recommendations about treatment of NTM pulmonary disease are provided. This
guideline is intended for use by healthcare professionals who care for patients
with NTM pulmonary disease, including specialists in infectious diseases and
pulmonary diseases.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com. This is a joint publication between Clinical
Infectious Diseases and the European Respiratory Journal. The articles are
identical except for minor stylistic and spelling differences in keeping with
each journal’s style. Either citation can be used when citing this article.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa241 
PMID: 32628747 

