
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 7;11:1701. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01701. eCollection
2020.

Genetic Diversity Among Mycobacterium avium Subspecies Revealed by Analysis of
Complete Genome Sequences.

Bannantine JP(1), Conde C(2), Bayles DO(1), Branger M(2), Biet F(2).

Author information: 
(1)USDA-Agricultural Research Service, National Animal Disease Center, Ames, IA, 
United States.
(2)INRAE, Université de Tours, ISP, Nouzilly, France.

Mycobacterium avium comprises four subspecies that contain both human and
veterinary pathogens. At the inception of this study, twenty-eight M. avium
genomes had been annotated as RefSeq genomes, facilitating direct comparisons.
These genomes represent strains from around the world and provided a unique
opportunity to examine genome dynamics in this species. Each genome was confirmed
to be classified correctly based on SNP genotyping, nucleotide identity and
presence/absence of repetitive elements or other typing methods. The
Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis (Map) genome size and
organization was remarkably consistent, averaging 4.8 Mb with a variance of only 
29.6 kb among the 13 strains. Comparing recombination events along with the
larger genome size and variance observed among Mycobacterium avium subspecies
avium (Maa) and Mycobacterium avium subspecies hominissuis (Mah) strains
(collectively termed non-Map) suggests horizontal gene transfer occurs in
non-Map, but not in Map strains. Overall, M. avium subspecies could be divided
into two major sub-divisions, with the Map type II (bovine strains) clustering
tightly on one end of a phylogenetic spectrum and Mah strains clustering more
loosely together on the other end. The most evolutionarily distinct Map strain
was an ovine strain, designated Telford, which had >1,000 SNPs and showed large
rearrangements compared to the bovine type II strains. The Telford strain
clustered with Maa strains as an intermediate between Map type II and Mah. SNP
analysis and genome organization analyses repeatedly demonstrated the conserved
nature of Map versus the mosaic nature of non-Map M. avium strains. Finally, core
and pangenomes were developed for Map and non-Map strains. A total of 80% Map
genes belonged to the Map core genome, while only 40% of non-Map genes belonged
to the non-Map core genome. These genomes provide a more complete and detailed
comparison of these subspecies strains as well as a blueprint for how genetic
diversity originated.

Copyright © 2020 Bannantine, Conde, Bayles, Branger and Biet.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01701 
PMCID: PMC7426613
PMID: 32849358 

