
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 Jul 17;10:357. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00357.
eCollection 2020.

CFTR Depletion Confers Hypersusceptibility to Mycobacterium fortuitum in a
Zebrafish Model.

Johansen MD(1), Kremer L(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique UMR 9004, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(2)INSERM, Institut de Recherche en Infectiologie de Montpellier, Montpellier,
France.

The Mycobacterium fortuitum complex comprises several closely related species,
causing pulmonary and extra-pulmonary infections. However, there is very limited 
knowledge about the disease pathogenesis involved in M. fortuitum infections,
particularly due to the lack of suitable animal models. Using the zebrafish
model, we show that embryos are susceptible to M. fortuitum infection in a
dose-dependent manner. Furthermore, zebrafish embryos form granulomas from as
early as 2 days post-infection, recapitulating critical aspects of mycobacterial 
pathogenesis observed in other pathogenic species. The formation of extracellular
cords in infected embryos highlights a previously unknown pathogenic feature of
M. fortuitum. The formation of large corded structures occurs also during in
vitro growth, suggesting that this is not a host-adapted stress mechanism
deployed during infection. Moreover, transient macrophage depletion led to rapid 
embryo death with increased extracellular cords, indicating that macrophages are 
essential determinants of M. fortuitum infection control. Importantly, morpholino
depletion of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (cftr)
significantly increased embryo death, bacterial burden, bacterial cords and
abscesses. There was a noticeable decrease in the number of cftr-deficient
infected embryos with granulomas as compared to infected controls, suggesting
that loss of CFTR leads to impaired host immune responses and confers
hypersusceptiblity to M. fortuitum infection. Overall, these findings highlight
the application of the zebrafish embryo to study M. fortuitum and emphasizes
previously unexplored aspects of disease pathogenesis of this significant
mycobacterial species.

Copyright © 2020 Johansen and Kremer.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00357 
PMCID: PMC7396536
PMID: 32850470 

