
1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 18;15(9):e0238178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238178.
eCollection 2020.

Dissecting the antibacterial activity of oxadiazolone-core derivatives against
Mycobacterium abscessus.

Madani A(1), Mallick I(1)(2), Guy A(3), Crauste C(3), Durand T(3), Fourquet P(4),
Audebert S(4), Camoin L(4), Canaan S(1), Cavalier JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille Univ., CNRS, LISM, Institut de Microbiologie de la Méditerranée 
FR3479, Marseille, France.
(2)IHU Méditerranée Infection, Aix-Marseille Univ., Marseille, France.
(3)IBMM, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, ENSCM, Montpellier, France.
(4)Aix-Marseille Univ, INSERM, CNRS, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CRCM, Marseille
Protéomique, Marseille, France.

Mycobacterium abscessus (M. abscessus), a rapidly growing mycobacterium, is an
emergent opportunistic pathogen responsible for chronic bronchopulmonary
infections in individuals with respiratory diseases such as cystic fibrosis. Most
treatments of M. abscessus pulmonary infections are poorly effective due to the
intrinsic resistance of this bacteria against a broad range of antibiotics
including anti-tuberculosis agents. Consequently, the number of drugs that are
efficient against M. abscessus remains limited. In this context, 19 oxadiazolone 
(OX) derivatives have been investigated for their antibacterial activity against 
both the rough (R) and smooth (S) variants of M. abscessus. Several OXs impair
extracellular M. abscessus growth with moderated minimal inhibitory
concentrations (MIC), or act intracellularly by inhibiting M. abscessus growth
inside infected macrophages with MIC values similar to those of imipenem. Such
promising results prompted us to identify the potential target enzymes of the
sole extra and intracellular inhibitor of M. abscessus growth, i.e., compound
iBpPPOX, via activity-based protein profiling combined with mass spectrometry.
This approach led to the identification of 21 potential protein candidates being 
mostly involved in M. abscessus lipid metabolism and/or in cell wall
biosynthesis. Among them, the Ag85C protein has been confirmed as a vulnerable
target of iBpPPOX. This study clearly emphasizes the potential of the OX
derivatives to inhibit the extracellular and/or intracellular growth of M.
abscessus by targeting various enzymes potentially involved in many physiological
processes of this most drug-resistant mycobacterial species.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238178 
PMCID: PMC7500638
PMID: 32946441 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

