
1. J Formos Med Assoc. 2020 Jun;119 Suppl 1:S51-S57. doi:
10.1016/j.jfma.2020.05.018. Epub 2020 Jun 4.

Treatment of pulmonary disease caused by Mycobacterium kansasii.

Huang HL(1), Lu PL(2), Lee CH(3), Chong IW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medicine, College
of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of
Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; College of Medicine, Chang Gung 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University
Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Medicine, College
of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department of
Respiratory Therapy, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Electronic address: chong@kmu.edu.tw.

As a cause of lung disease (LD), Mycobacterium kansasii is regarded as a highly
virulent species among nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM). Both the frequency of
M. kansasii isolates and global prevalence of M. kansasii-LD have increased
gradually over recent decades. Treatment of M. kansasii-LD is recommended because
of the disease's poor prognosis and fatal outcome. The decision on the optimal
time point for treatment initiation should be based on both the benefits and
risks posed by multiple antimicrobial agents. For treatment-naïve patients with
M. kansasii-LD, rifampin-containing multiple antimicrobial regimens for ≥12
months after culture negative conversion are effective. However, some challenges 
remain, such as determining the precise length of treatment duration as well as
addressing intolerable adverse effects, the uncertain effectiveness of isoniazid 
and ethambutol in treatment, the uncertain correlation between in vitro drug
susceptibility testing and clinical outcomes, and the increasing prevalence of
clarithromycin-resistant M. kansasii isolates. Short-course and effective
therapies must be developed. New candidate drugs, such as tedizoid and
clofazimine, exhibit excellent antimycobacterial activity against M. kansasii
in vitro, but in vivo studies of their clinical applications are lacking. This
paper reviews the treatment, outcomes and future directions in patients with M.
kansasii-LD.

Copyright © 2020 Formosan Medical Association. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jfma.2020.05.018 
PMID: 32505588 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no conflicts of interest relevant to this article.

