
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 15;149:104476. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104476. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Differences in the coinfective process of Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus
agalactiae in bovine mammary epithelial cells infected by Mycobacterium avium
subsp. paratuberculosis.

Pena JL(1), Gonçalves Schwarz DG(2), Willian de Lima Brasil A(3), Licursi de
Oliveira L(4), Albuquerque Caldeira JL(5), Scatamburlo Moreira MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil. 
Electronic address: junnialuisa@hotmail.com.
(2)Veterinary Medicine, Universidade Federal do Piauí, Campus Professora
Cinobelina Elvas, Bom Jesus, PI, Brazil. Electronic address:
davidggs.vet@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Morphology, Universidade Federal da Paraíba, Campus I Centro de 
Ciências da Saúde, João Pessoa, PA, Brazil. Electronic address:
arthurwillian7@yahoo.com.br.
(4)Department of General Biology, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG,
Brazil. Electronic address: leandro.licursi@ufv.br.
(5)Department of Veterinary, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil. 
Electronic address: jessicalobo.vet@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Veterinary, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil. 
Electronic address: masm@ufv.br.

The interactions between Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) and
the causative agents of bovine mastitis are still relatively unknown. Still, it
is suspected that they may contribute to the worsening and persistence of
mastitis within the mammary epithelial cells. Considering the growing economic
implications of paratuberculosis and subclinical mastitis in dairy herds, this
study aimed to determine the coinfection interaction between MAP and S. aureus or
S. agalactiae in bovine mammary epithelial cells (MAC-T) in an ex-vivo model. For
this purpose, internalisation tests of MAP + S. aureus or MAP + S. agalactiae
were performed in MAC-T cells for 10, 30 and 120 min. The qPCR was performed to
quantify internalised MAP at the time of exposure. Colony-forming units were
counted on BHI agar medium for internalised subclinical mastitis bacteria at each
time of infection. Viability tests of MAC-T cells, using the lactate
dehydrogenase assay, were performed. The results showed that in the MAC-T cells
previously infected by MAP and subsequently by S. aureus, there was a rapid
internalisation in the first 10 min, maintaining a higher number of internalised 
bacteria during all exposure times. Regarding MAP + S. agalactiae, there were no 
changes in the internalisation patterns. The amount of MAP remained constant at
all times evaluated, and there was no compromise in the viability of MAC-T cells 
during the tests. Thus, the results demonstrate the existence of an interaction
between MAP + S. aureus, favouring internalisation and being able to contribute
to the persistence of subclinical mastitis in dairy herds.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104476 
PMID: 32941969 

