
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2019 Dec;127(6):1635-1645. doi: 10.1111/jam.14448. Epub 2019
Oct 7.

Association of Myroides odoratimimus in immunocompromized piglets with post
weaning multisystemic wasting syndrome.

Choudhary M(1), Choudhary BK(1), Bera BC(2), Chaudhari SP(3), Giri DK(4), Ghosh
RC(4), Barbuddhe SB(5).

Author information: 
(1)ICAR-National Institute of Biotic Stress Management, Raipur, Chhattisgarh,
India.
(2)ICAR-NCVTC, National Research Centre on Equines, Hisar, Haryana, India.
(3)Department of Veterinary Public Health, Centre for Zoonoses, Nagpur Veterinary
College, Maharashtra Animal and Fishery Sciences University, Nagpur, India.
(4)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Science & A.H.,
Chhattisgarh Kamdhenu Vishwavidylaya, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India.
(5)ICAR-National Research Centre on Meat, Chengicherla, Hyderabad, India.

AIM: To study the association of opportunistic infection due to Myroides
odoratimimus in piglets immunocompromised by porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2)
infection.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The clinical samples (n = 101) were analysed
bacteriologically. The isolates were identified by their phenotypes and MALDI
TOF-MS analysis as Myroides species. The phylogram constructed based on
nucleotide sequences of the 16S rRNA gene showed identity (~99%) with the M.
odoratimimus isolates. The minimum inhibitory concentration values for
antibiotics revealed M. odoratimimus to be resistant against carbapenem,
cephalosporins, aminoglycosides and fluoroquinolones. The presence of PCV2 in
affected tissue samples was confirmed by amplification of the 565 bp region of
ORF2 of the PCV2 genome. The topology of the phylogenetic tree grouped the PCV2
with cluster-2d.
CONCLUSIONS: PCV2 being immunosuppressive in nature might have impaired the
immunity thereby increasing the susceptibility of immunocompromised piglets to
opportunistic pathogens such as M. odoratimimus leading to disease severity and
high mortality. The M. odoratimimus isolates were found to be multidrug resistant
and evidenced for uncertain clinical relevance and hence could act as hidden
source of public health hazard.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Myroides odoratimimus is a rarely reported 
human pathogen. We reported the incidence of infection due to seemingly rare
isolates of M. odoratimimus causing an outbreak of pneumonia in piglets. This
appears, to the best of authors' knowledge, to be the first outbreak due to
Myroides recorded in animal clinical cases described in the literature.

© 2019 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14448 
PMID: 31517421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

