
1. Jpn J Infect Dis. 2020 May 29. doi: 10.7883/yoken.JJJID.2019.536. [Epub ahead of 
print]

A healthcare-associated outbreak of urinary tract infections due to Myroides
odoratimimus.

Kutlu HH(1), Avcı M(2), Dal T(3), Arı O(4), Durmaz R(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Usak University.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Usak
University.
(3)Medical Microbiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit 
University.
(4)Central Research Laboratory, Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University.

Myroides spp. are low-grade opportunistic pathogens. There were only a few
outbreaks due to Myroides spp. described in the literature to date. We report a
healthcare-associated outbreak of urinary tract infections caused by Myroides
odoratimimus in a Turkish hospital. From March to May 2019, six strains of M.
odoratimimus were isolated from the urine samples of patients hospitalized in the
intensive care units (ICUs). After identification and antibiotic susceptibility
testing with VITEK 2 system, MALDI-TOF-MS and 16S rRNA based sequencing methods
were performed for confirmation and species level identification. Pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was used to investigate clonal relatedness of the
isolates. All the patients were immunocompromised and underwent urinary
catheterization. None of them had urinary neoplasm, surgery or calculi. VITEK 2
and MALDI-TOF-MS systems revealed that the isolates belong to the Myroides genus 
but lacked to identify the isolates at the species level. 16S rRNA based
sequencing successfully identified all the isolates as M. odoratimimus. The
isolates were resistant to all antibiotics tested. All isolates had
indistinguishable PFGE pattern indicating cross-transmission between cases.
Although M. odoratimimus is rarely isolated from human specimens, clinicians
should be aware of its ability to cause UTIs and outbreaks.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken.JJJID.2019.536 
PMID: 32475882 

