
1. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2020 Jul 15;107(4):736-746. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.04.015. Epub 2020 Apr 18.

Gut Microbiome Composition Is Associated with a Pathologic Response After
Preoperative Chemoradiation in Patients with Rectal Cancer.

Jang BS(1), Chang JH(2), Chie EK(3), Kim K(4), Park JW(5), Kim MJ(5), Song EJ(6),
Nam YD(6), Kang SW(7), Jeong SY(5), Kim HJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, Korea.
(2)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea; Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Ewha Womans University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea;
Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
(6)Department of Food Biotechnology, Korea University of Science and Technology, 
Daejeon, Korea; Research Group of Healthcare, Korea Food Research Institute,
Wanju, Korea.
(7)Department of Nursing, Seoul National University College of Nursing, Seoul,
Korea.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea; Department of Radiation Oncology, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: khjae@snu.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: There are ongoing investigations to find promising biomarkers for
predicting a complete response (CR) after concurrent chemoradiation (CCRT) in
rectal cancer. We aimed to find the predictive value in the gut microbiome in
terms of response after preoperative CCRT.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We collected a total of 45 fecal samples from patients
with rectal cancer before CCRT. Tumor response after CCRT was assessed according 
to the American Joint Committee on Cancer tumor regression grading system.
Analysis of linear discriminant analysis effect size and MetaCyc pathway
abundance predictions were performed to compare composition and metabolic
function of microbiome between patients with and without CR. We also established 
a Bayesian network model to identify microbial networks and species to be related
with CCRT response.
RESULTS: Seven patients (15.6%) demonstrated pathologically CR, and 38 patients
(84.4%) showed non-CR after preoperative CCRT. Between CR and non-CR patients,
there was a significant difference in terms of β-diversity (P = .028), but no
difference in α-diversity was found. Bacteroidales (Bacteroidaceae,
Rikenellaceae, Bacteroides) were relatively more abundant in patients with non-CR
than those with CR. Pathways related to anabolic function predominated in CR
patients. According to Bayesian network analysis, Duodenibacillus massiliensis
was linked with the improved CR rate.
CONCLUSIONS: From the fecal microbiome using samples obtained before preoperative
CCRT, differences in microbial community composition and functions were observed 
between patients with and without CR in rectal cancer. However, the finding that 
a specific taxon may be linked with the improved therapeutic response should be
verified in a prospective setting.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2020.04.015 
PMID: 32315676 

