
1. Front Microbiol. 2019 Dec 20;10:2932. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02932. eCollection 
2019.

Evidence of a Cellulosic Layer in Pandoravirus massiliensis Tegument and the
Mystery of the Genetic Support of Its Biosynthesis.

Brahim Belhaouari D(1), Baudoin JP(1), Gnankou F(1), Di Pinto F(1), Colson
P(1)(2), Aherfi S(1)(2), La Scola B(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbes, Evolution, Phylogeny and Infection (MEPHI), UM63, Institut de
Recherche pour le Développement (IRD), Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de
Marseille (AP-HM), Aix-Marseille University, Marseille, France.
(2)IHU Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.

Pandoraviruses are giant viruses of ameba with 1 μm-long virions. They have an
ovoid morphology and are surrounded by a tegument-like structure lacking any
capsid protein nor any gene encoding a capsid protein. In this work, we studied
the ultrastructure of the tegument surrounding Pandoravirus massiliensis virions 
and noticed that this tegument is composed of a peripheral sugar layer, an
electron-dense membrane, and a thick electron-dense layer consisting in several
tubules arranged in a helicoidal structure resembling that of cellulose.
Pandoravirus massiliensis particles were stained by Calcofluor white, a
fluorescent dye of cellulose, and the enzymatic treatment of particles by
cellulase showed the degradation of the viral tegument. We first hypothesized
that the cellulose tegument could be synthesized by enzymes encoded by the virus.
Bioinformatic analyses revealed in P. massiliensis, a candidate gene encoding a
putative cellulose synthase, with a homology with the BcsA domain, one of the
catalytic subunits of the bacterial cellulose synthase, but with a low level of
homology. This gene was transcribed during the replicative cycle of P.
massiliensis, but several arguments run counter to this hypothesis. Indeed, even 
if this gene is present in other pandoraviruses, the one of the strain studied is
the only one to have this BcsA domain and no other enzymes involved in the
synthesis of cellulose could be detected, although we cannot rule out that such
genes could have been undetected among the large proportion of Orfans of
pandoraviruses. As an alternative, we investigated whether P. massiliensis could 
divert the cellulose synthesis machinery of the ameba to its own account. Indeed,
contrary to what is observed in the case of infections with other giant viruses
such as mimiviruses, it appears that the transcription of the ameba, at least for
the cellulose synthase gene, continues throughout the growth phase of particles
of P. massiliensis. Finally, we believe that this scenario is more plausible. If 
confirmed, it could be a unique mechanism in the virosphere.

Copyright © 2019 Brahim Belhaouari, Baudoin, Gnankou, Di Pinto, Colson, Aherfi
and La Scola.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02932 
PMCID: PMC6932959
PMID: 31921087 

