
1. Microb Genom. 2020 May;6(5). doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000372. Epub 2020 May 4.

Identification of integrative and conjugative elements in pathogenic and
commensal Neisseriaceae species via genomic distributions of DNA uptake sequence 
dialects.

Hughes-Games A(1)(2), Roberts AP(3), Davis SA(4), Hill DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bristol Centre for Functional Nanomaterials, HH Wills Physics Laboratory,
University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(2)School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.
(3)Centre for Drugs and Diagnostics, Department of Tropical Disease Biology,
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
(4)School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK.

Mobile genetic elements (MGEs) are key factors responsible for dissemination of
virulence determinants and antimicrobial-resistance genes amongst pathogenic
bacteria. Conjugative MGEs are notable for their high gene loads donated per
transfer event, broad host ranges and phylogenetic ubiquity amongst prokaryotes, 
with the subclass of chromosomally inserted integrative and conjugative elements 
(ICEs) being particularly abundant. The focus on a small number of model systems 
has biased the study of ICEs towards those conferring readily selectable
phenotypes to host cells, whereas the identification and characterization of
integrated cryptic elements remains challenging. Even though antimicrobial
resistance and horizontally acquired virulence genes are major factors
aggravating neisserial infection, conjugative MGEs of Neisseria gonorrhoeae and
Neisseria meningitidis remain poorly characterized. Using a phenotype-independent
approach based on atypical distributions of DNA uptake sequences (DUSs) in MGEs
relative to the chromosomal background, we have identified two groups of
chromosomally integrated conjugative elements in Neisseria: one found almost
exclusively in pathogenic species possibly deriving from the genus Kingella, the 
other belonging to a group of Neisseria mucosa-like commensals. The former
element appears to enable transfer of traditionally gonococcal-specific loci such
as the virulence-associated toxin-antitoxin system fitAB to N. meningitidis
chromosomes, whilst the circular form of the latter possesses a unique attachment
site (attP) sequence seemingly adapted to exploit DUS motifs as chromosomal
integration sites. In addition to validating the use of DUS distributions in
Neisseriaceae MGE identification, the >170 identified ICE sequences provide a
valuable resource for future studies of ICE evolution and host adaptation.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000372 
PMCID: PMC7371117
PMID: 32375974 

