
1. Microb Genom. 2020 Sep;6(9). doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.000423. Epub 2020 Aug 26.

Virulence genes and previously unexplored gene clusters in four commensal
Neisseria spp. isolated from the human throat expand the neisserial gene
repertoire.

Calder A(1), Menkiti CJ(1), Çağdaş A(1), Lisboa Santos J(1), Streich R(1), Wong
A(1), Avini AH(1), Bojang E(1), Yogamanoharan K(1), Sivanesan N(1), Ali B(1),
Ashrafi M(1), Issa A(1), Kaur T(1), Latif A(1), Mohamed HAS(1), Maqsood A(1),
Tamang L(1), Swager E(1), Stringer AJ(1), Snyder LAS(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Pharmacy, and Chemistry, Kingston University,
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE, UK.

Commensal non-pathogenic Neisseria spp. live within the human host alongside the 
pathogenic Neisseria meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae and due to natural
competence, horizontal gene transfer within the genus is possible and has been
observed. Four distinct Neisseria spp. isolates taken from the throats of two
human volunteers have been assessed here using a combination of microbiological
and bioinformatics techniques. Three of the isolates have been identified as
Neisseria subflava biovar perflava and one as Neisseria cinerea. Specific gene
clusters have been identified within these commensal isolate genome sequences
that are believed to encode a Type VI Secretion System, a newly identified CRISPR
system, a Type IV Secretion System unlike that in other Neisseria spp., a hemin
transporter, and a haem acquisition and utilization system. This investigation is
the first to investigate these systems in either the non-pathogenic or pathogenic
Neisseria spp. In addition, the N. subflava biovar perflava possess previously
unreported capsule loci and sequences have been identified in all four isolates
that are similar to genes seen within the pathogens that are associated with
virulence. These data from the four commensal isolates provide further evidence
for a Neisseria spp. gene pool and highlight the presence of systems within the
commensals with functions still to be explored.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.000423 
PMID: 32845827 

