
1. Oral Oncol. 2020 Aug;107:104710. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2020.104710. Epub
2020 May 3.

Composition and function of oral microbiota between gingival squamous cell
carcinoma and periodontitis.

Li Y(1), Tan X(2), Zhao X(1), Xu Z(2), Dai W(2), Duan W(2), Huang S(2), Zhang
E(2), Liu J(1), Zhang S(1), Yin R(1), Shi X(1), Lu Z(1), Pan Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Stomatology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Oral Maxillofacial-Head and Neck Surgery, School of Stomatology,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(3)Department of Periodontology, School of Stomatology, China Medical University,
Shenyang, China. Electronic address: yppan@cmu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have proved that periodontitis is an independent
risk factor of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) epidemiologically. Along with 
the important role of microbiota in the cancer process and the specific
anatomical position, our study explored the microbial composition and functions
in periodontitis and gingival squamous cell carcinoma (GSCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: GSCC patients (n = 10), matched periodontitis patients
(n = 15), and healthy individuals (n = 15) were recruited. Saliva, subgingival
plaque, tongue dorsum, buccal mucosa, cancerous tissue, and paracancerous tissue 
samples were collected. 16S rDNA amplicon sequencing and functional prediction
were applied for the taxonomic analysis.
RESULTS: Periodontal pathogens occupied 46% in GSCC. Besides, the mutual
operational taxonomy unites (OTU) generated from the subgingival plaque occupied 
38.36% and 44.13% from saliva. Fusobacterium, Peptostreptococcus, and Prevotella 
were more abundant in cancerous tissues, while Streptococcus, Neisseria, and
Haemophilus were more enriched in saliva or soft mucosa. PCoA exhibited similar
cluster between tongue dorsum and saliva in GSCC. GSCC showed lower richness than
periodontitis. In saliva and subgingival plaque, Atopobium was more prevalent in 
GSCC than periodontitis and controls in descending order. Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) biosynthesis increased in subgingival plaque of GSCC compared with the
other two groups.
CONCLUSION: Periodontal pathogens were abundant in GSCC. Cancerous tissues harbor
enriched periodontal pathogens while saliva or soft mucosa harbored more
periodontal health related bacteria. A high level of Atopobium in saliva and LPS 
biosynthesis have the potential for increasing the risk of suffering from GSCC in
individuals with periodontitis, which needs more evidence to clarify it.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2020.104710 
PMID: 32371264 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

