
1. Glycobiology. 2020 Aug 8. pii: cwaa073. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwaa073. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Allelic polymorphisms in a glycosyltransferase gene shape glycan repertoire in
the O-linked protein glycosylation system of Neisseria.

Wang N(1)(2), Anonsen JH(1)(3), Hadjineophytou C(1)(2), Reinar WB(4), Børud B(5),
Vik Å(1)(6), Koomey M(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Section for Section for Genetics and Evolutionary
Biology, Centre for Integrative Microbial Evolution, University of Oslo, 0371
Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Centre for Integrative Microbial Evolution,
University of Oslo, 0371 Oslo, Norway.
(3)Norwegian Research Centre AS, 4072 Randaberg, Norway.
(4)Department of Biosciences, Centre for Ecological and Evolutionary Synthesis,
University of Oslo, Norway.
(5)Division for Infection Control and Environmental Health, Norwegian Institute
of Public Health, 0403 Oslo, Norway.
(6)Research Council of Norway, 0283, Oslo, Norway.

Glycosylation of multiple proteins via O-linkage is well documented in bacterial 
species of Neisseria of import to human disease. Recent studies of protein
glycosylation (pgl) gene distribution established that related protein
glycosylation systems occur throughout the genus including non-pathogenic
species. However, there are inconsistencies between pgl gene status and observed 
glycan structures. One of these relates to the widespread distribution of pglG,
encoding a glycosyltransferase that in Neisseria elongata subsp. glycolytica is
responsible for the addition of di-N-acetyl glucuronic acid at the third position
of a tetrasaccharide. Despite pglG residing in strains of N. gonorrhoeae, N.
meningitidis and N. lactamica, no glycan structures have been correlated with its
presence in these backgrounds. Moreover, PglG function in N. elongata subsp.
glycolytica minimally requires UDP-glucuronic acid (GlcNAcA), and yet N.
gonorrhoeae, N. meningitidis and N. lactamica lack pglJ, the gene whose product
is essential for UDP-GlcNAcA synthesis. We examined the functionality of pglG
alleles from species spanning the Neisseria genus by genetic complementation in
N. elongata subsp. glycolytica. The results indicate that select pglG alleles
from N. meningitidis and N. lactamica are associated with incorporation of an
N-acetyl-hexosamine at the third position and reveal the potential for an
expanded glycan repertoire in those species. Similar experiments using pglG from 
N. gonorrhoeae failed to find any evidence of function suggesting that those
alleles are missense pseudogenes. Taken together, the results are emblematic of
how allelic polymorphisms can shape bacterial glycosyltransferase function and
demonstrate that such alterations may be constrained to distinct phylogenetic
lineages.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/glycob/cwaa073 
PMID: 32776107 

