
1. J Bacteriol. 2019 Sep 20;201(20). pii: e00170-19. doi: 10.1128/JB.00170-19. Print
2019 Oct 15.

Contribution of σ70 and σN Factors to Expression of Class II pilE in Neisseria
meningitidis.

Lobanovska M(1), Tang CM(1), Exley RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(2)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom rachel.exley02@path.ox.ac.uk.

Neisseria meningitidis expresses multicomponent organelles called type four pili 
(Tfp), which are key virulence factors required for attachment to human cells
during carriage and disease. Pilin (PilE) is the main component of Tfp, and N.
meningitidis isolates either have a class I pilE locus and express pilins that
undergo antigenic variation or have a class II pilE locus and express invariant
pilins. The transcriptional regulation of class I pilE has been studied in both
N. meningitidis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, while the control of expression of
class II pilE has been elucidated in the nonpathogenic species Neisseria elongata
However, the factors that govern the regulation of the class II pilE gene in N.
meningitidis are not known. In this work, we have bioinformatically and
experimentally identified the class II pilE promoter. We confirmed the presence
of conserved σ70 and σN-dependent promoters upstream of pilE in a collection of
meningococcal genomes and demonstrated that class II pilE expression initiates
from the σ70 family-dependent promoter. By deletion or overexpression of sigma
factors, we showed that σN, σH, and σE do not affect class II pilin expression.
These findings are consistent with a role of the housekeeping σD in expression of
this important component of Tfp. Taken together, our data indicate that the
σ-dependent network responsible for the expression of class II pilE has been
selected to maintain pilE expression, consistent with the essential roles of Tfp 
in colonization and pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE The type four pilus (Tfp) of
Neisseria meningitidis contributes to fundamental processes such as adhesion,
transformation, and disease pathology. Meningococci express one of two distinct
classes of Tfp (class I or class II), which can be distinguished antigenically or
by the major subunit (pilE) locus and its genetic context. The factors that
govern transcription of the class II pilE gene are not known, even though it is
present in isolates that cause epidemic disease. Here we show that the
transcription of class II pilE is maintained throughout growth and under
different stress conditions and is driven by a σ70-dependent promoter. This is
distinct from Tfp regulation in nonpathogenic Neisseria spp. and may confer an
advantage during host-cell interaction and infection.

Copyright © 2019 Lobanovska et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00170-19 
PMCID: PMC6755734
PMID: 31331980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

