
1. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2020 Feb 25;58(3):340-349. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2019-0657.

Gut microbiome investigation in celiac disease: from methods to its pathogenetic 
role.

Sacchetti L(1)(2), Nardelli C(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate SCarl, Naples, Italy.
(2)Task Force on Microbiome Studies, Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II
and CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate SCarl, Naples, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

Our body is inhabited by a variety of microbes (microbiota), mainly bacteria,
that outnumber our own cells. Until recently, most of what we knew about the
human microbiota was based on culture methods, whereas a large part of the
microbiota is uncultivable, and consequently previous information was limited.
The advent of culture-independent methods and, particularly, of next-generation
sequencing (NGS) methodology, marked a turning point in studies of the microbiota
in terms of its composition and of the genes encoded by these microbes
(microbiome). The microbiome is influenced predominantly by environmental factors
that cause a large inter-individual variability (~20%) being its heritability
only 1.9%. The gut microbiome plays a relevant role in human physiology, and its 
alteration ("dysbiosis") has been linked to a variety of inflammatory gut
diseases, including celiac disease (CD). CD is a chronic, immune-mediated
disorder that is triggered by both genetic (mainly HLA-DQ2/DQ8 haplotypes) and
environmental factors (gluten), but, in recent years, a large body of
experimental evidence suggested that the gut microbiome is an additional
contributing factor to the pathogenesis of CD. In this review, we summarize the
literature that has investigated the gut microbiome associated with CD, the
methods and biological samples usually employed in CD microbiome investigations
and the putative pathogenetic role of specific microbial alterations in CD. In
conclusion, both gluten-microbe and host-microbe interactions drive the
gluten-mediated immune response. However, it remains to be established whether
the CD-associated dysbiosis is the consequence of the disease, a simple
concomitant association or a concurring causative factor.

DOI: 10.1515/cclm-2019-0657 
PMID: 31494628 

