
1. Theriogenology. 2020 Aug 15;157:525-533. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2020.08.001. [Epub ahead of print]

A pilot RNA-seq study in 40 pietrain ejaculates to characterize the porcine sperm
microbiome.

Gòdia M(1), Ramayo-Caldas Y(2), Zingaretti LM(3), Darwich L(4), López S(5),
Rodríguez-Gil JE(6), Yeste M(7), Sánchez A(8), Clop A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address:
marta.godia@cragenomica.es.
(2)Animal Breeding and Genetics Program, Institute for Research and Technology in
Food and Agriculture (IRTA), Torre Marimon, 08140, Caldes de Montbui, Catalonia, 
Spain; GABI, INRA, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, UMR, 1313,
Jouy-en-Josas, France. Electronic address: yuliaxis.ramayo@irta.cat.
(3)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address:
laura.zingaretti@cragenomica.es.
(4)Departament de Sanitat i d'Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain; IRTA, Centre de Recerca en Sanitat
Animal (CReSA, IRTA-UAB), Campus de la Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193, 
Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address: Laila.darwich@uab.cat.
(5)Department of condensed matter physics, Faculty of Physics, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Cataloina, 08028, Spain. Electronic address:
samantha.lopezm94@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Animal Medicine and Surgery, School of Veterinary Sciences,
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia,
Spain. Electronic address: JuanEnrique.Rodriguez@uab.cat.
(7)Biotechnology of Animal and Human Reproduction (TechnoSperm), Unit of Cell
Biology, Department of Biology, Institute of Food and Agricultural Technology,
Faculty of Sciences, University of Girona, E-17003 Girona, Catalonia, Spain.
Electronic address: marc.yeste@udg.edu.
(8)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain; Departament de Ciència
Animal i dels Aliments, School of Veterinary Sciences, Universitat Autonoma de
Barcelona, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain. Electronic address:
armand.sanchez@uab.cat.
(9)Centre for Research in Agricultural Genomics (CRAG) CSIC-IRTA-UAB-UB, Campus
UAB, 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain; Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Electronic address: alex.clop@cragenomica.es.

The microbiome plays a key role in homeostasis and health and it has been also
linked to fertility and semen quality in several animal species including swine. 
Despite the more than likely importance of sperm bacteria on the boar's
reproductive ability and the dissemination of pathogens and antimicrobial
resistance genes, the high throughput characterization of the swine sperm
microbiome remains scarce. We carried RNA-seq on 40 ejaculates each from a
different Pietrain boar and found that a proportion of the sequencing reads did
not map to the Sus scrofa genome. The current study aimed at using these reads
not belonging to pig to carry a pilot study to profile the boar sperm bacterial
population and its relation with 7 semen quality traits. We found that the boar
sperm contains a broad population of bacteria. The most abundant phyla were
Proteobacteria (39.1%), Firmicutes (27.5%), Actinobacteria (14.9%) and
Bacteroidetes (5.7%). The predominant species contaminated sperm after
ejaculation from soil, faeces and water sources (Bacillus megaterium,
Brachybacterium faecium, Bacillus coagulans). Some potential pathogens were also 
found but at relatively low levels (Escherichia coli, Clostridioides difficile,
Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium botulinum and Mycobacterium tuberculosis).
We also identified 3 potential antibiotic resistant genes from E. coli against
chloramphenicol, Neisseria meningitidis against spectinomycin and Staphylococcus 
aureus against linezolid. None of these genes were highly abundant. Finally, we
classified the ejaculates into categories according to their bacterial features
and semen quality parameters and identified two categories that significantly
differed for 5 semen quality traits and 13 bacterial features including the
genera Acinetobacter, Stenotrophomonas and Rhodobacter. Our results show that
boar semen contains a bacterial community, including potential pathogens and
putative antibiotic resistance genes, and that these bacteria may affect its
reproductive performance.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.theriogenology.2020.08.001 
PMID: 32971422 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

