
1. Mucosal Immunol. 2020 Aug 5. doi: 10.1038/s41385-020-0331-5. [Epub ahead of
print]

Human endometrial MAIT cells are transiently tissue resident and respond to
Neisseria gonorrhoeae.

Bister J(1), Crona Guterstam Y(2), Strunz B(1), Dumitrescu B(3), Haij Bhattarai
K(4), Özenci V(4), Brännström M(5), Ivarsson MA(1), Gidlöf S(2)(6), Björkström
NK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Department of Clinical Science,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Women's Clinic, Mälarsjukhuset Eskilstuna, Eskilstuna, Sweden.
(4)Clinical microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg, Göteborg and Stockholm IVF - Eugin, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stockholm South General Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Center for Infectious Medicine, Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
niklas.bjorkstrom@ki.se.

Mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells are non-classical T cells important in
the mucosal defense against microbes. Despite an increasing interest in the
immunobiology of the endometrial mucosa, little is known regarding human MAIT
cells in this compartment. The potential role of MAIT cells as a tissue-resident 
local defense against microbes in the endometrium is largely unexplored. Here, we
performed a high-dimensional flow cytometry characterization of MAIT cells in
endometrium from pre- and postmenopausal women, and in decidua from
first-trimester pregnancies. Furthermore, we assessed MAIT cell function by
stimulation with Neisseria gonorrhoeae (N. gonorrhoeae). Endometrial MAIT (eMAIT)
cells represented a stable endometrial immune cell population as limited dynamic 
changes were observed during the menstrual cycle, post menopause, or in response 
to pregnancy. Furthermore, eMAIT cells exhibited an activated tissue-resident
phenotype. Despite expressing CD69 and CD103, eMAIT cells were replenished over
time by circulating MAIT cells, as assessed using human uterus transplantation as
a model. Finally, functional experiments revealed the capability of MAIT cells to
respond to the sexually transmitted and tissue-relevant pathogen, N. gonorrhoeae.
In conclusion, our study provides novel insight into human MAIT cell dynamics and
anti-microbial properties in the human uterus.

DOI: 10.1038/s41385-020-0331-5 
PMID: 32759973 

