
1. Genome Biol Evol. 2020 Feb 1;12(2):3938-3950. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evaa023.

Meningococcal Disease-Associated Prophage-Like Elements Are Present in Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae and Some Commensal Neisseria Species.

Al Suwayyid BA(1)(2)(3), Rankine-Wilson L(1)(2), Speers DJ(4)(5), Wise MJ(1)(6), 
Coombs GW(7)(8), Kahler CM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Marshall Centre for Infectious Diseases Research and Training, The
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Crawley,
Australia.
(3)Ministry of Education, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, Queen Elizabeth
II Medical Centre, Nedlands, Australia.
(5)School of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Crawley,
Australia.
(6)Computer Science and Software Engineering, The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Australia.
(7)Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA, Fiona Stanley
Hospital, Murdoch, Australia.
(8)Antimicrobial Resistance and Infectious Diseases Research Laboratory, School
of Veterinary Life Sciences, Murdoch University, Australia.

Neisseria spp. possess four genogroups of filamentous prophages, termed Nf1 to 4.
A filamentous bacteriophage from the Nf1 genogroup termed meningococcal
disease-associated phage (MDA φ) is associated with clonal complexes of Neisseria
meningitidis that cause invasive meningococcal disease. Recently, we recovered an
isolate of Neisseria gonorrhoeae (ExNg63) from a rare case of gonococcal
meningitis, and found that it possessed a region with 90% similarity to Nf1
prophages, specifically, the meningococcal MDA φ. This led to the hypothesis that
the Nf1 prophage may be more widely distributed amongst the genus Neisseria. An
analysis of 92 reference genomes revealed the presence of intact Nf1 prophages in
the commensal species, Neisseria lactamica and Neisseria cinerea in addition to
the pathogen N. gonorrhoeae. In N. gonorrhoeae, Nf1 prophages had a restricted
distribution but were present in all representatives of MLST ST1918. Of the 160
phage integration sites identified, only one common insertion site was found
between one isolate of N. gonorrhoeae and N. meningitidis. There was an absence
of any obvious conservation of the receptor for prophage entry, PilE, suggesting 
that the phage may have been obtained by natural transformation. An examination
of the restriction modification systems and mutated mismatch repair systems with 
prophage presence suggested that there was no obvious preference for these hosts.
A timed phylogeny inferred that N. meningitidis was the donor of the Nf1
prophages in N. lactamica and N. gonorrhoeae. Further work is required to
determine whether Nf1 prophages are active and can act as accessory colonization 
factors in these species.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

DOI: 10.1093/gbe/evaa023 
PMCID: PMC7058167
PMID: 32031617 

