
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Oct 2;16(10):e1008882. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008882. [Epub
ahead of print]

4CMenB vaccine induces elite cross-protective human antibodies that compete with 
human factor H for binding to meningococcal fHbp.

Veggi D(1), Bianchi F(2), Santini L(1), Lo Surdo P(3), Chesterman CC(3),
Pansegrau W(1), Bechi N(1), Huang Y(3), Masignani V(1), Pizza M(1), Rappuoli
R(1), Bottomley MJ(3), Cozzi R(1), Maione D(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK, Siena, Italy.
(2)University of Florence, Firenze, Italy.
(3)GSK, Rockville, MD, United States of America.

Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B (MenB) is the leading cause of meningococcal
meningitis and sepsis in industrialized countries, with the highest incidence in 
infants and adolescents. Two recombinant protein vaccines that protect against
MenB are now available (i.e. 4CMenB and MenB-fHbp). Both vaccines contain the
Factor H Binding Protein (fHbp) antigen, which can bind the Human Factor H (fH), 
the main negative regulator of the alternative complement pathway, thus enabling 
bacterial survival in the blood. fHbp is present in meningococcal strains as
three main variants which are immunologically distinct. Here we sought to obtain 
detailed information about the epitopes targeted by anti-fHbp antibodies induced 
by immunization with the 4CMenB multicomponent vaccine. Thirteen anti-fHbp human 
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) were identified in a library of over 100 antibody
fragments (Fabs) obtained from three healthy adult volunteers immunized with
4CMenB. Herein, the key cross-reactive mAbs were further characterized for
antigen binding affinity, complement-mediated serum bactericidal activity (SBA)
and the ability to inhibit binding of fH to live bacteria. For the first time, we
identified a subset of anti-fHbp mAbs able to elicit human SBA against strains
with all three variants and able to compete with human fH for fHbp binding. We
present the crystal structure of fHbp v1.1 complexed with human antibody 4B3. The
structure, combined with mutagenesis and binding studies, revealed the critical
cross-reactive epitope. The structure also provided the molecular basis of
competition for fH binding. These data suggest that the fH binding site on fHbp
v.1.1 can be accessible to the human immune system upon immunization, enabling
elicitation of human mAbs broadly protective against MenB. The novel structural, 
biochemical and functional data are of great significance because the human
vaccine-elicited mAbs are the first reported to inhibit the binding of fH to
fHbp, and are bactericidal with human complement. Our studies provide molecular
insights into the human immune response to the 4CMenB meningococcal vaccine and
fuel the rationale for combined structural, immunological and functional studies 
when seeking deeper understanding of the mechanisms of action of human vaccines.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008882 
PMID: 33007046 

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: All authors except
Federica Bianchi were permanent employees of Novartis Vaccines at the time of the
study and are now permanent employees of the GSK group of companies. Several
authors are listed as inventors on patents owned by the GSK group of companies.

