
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Sep;159(3):944-955.e8. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.048. 
Epub 2020 May 20.

Alterations in Gut Microbiota of Patients With COVID-19 During Time of
Hospitalization.

Zuo T(1), Zhang F(1), Lui GCY(2), Yeoh YK(3), Li AYL(4), Zhan H(1), Wan Y(1),
Chung ACK(1), Cheung CP(1), Chen N(1), Lai CKC(5), Chen Z(5), Tso EYK(6), Fung
KSC(7), Chan V(6), Ling L(8), Joynt G(8), Hui DSC(2), Chan FKL(9), Chan PKS(10), 
Ng SC(11).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory for
Digestive Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, Li Ka Shing Institute of
Health Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China;
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; Stanley Ho Centre for Emerging
Infectious Diseases, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong,
China.
(3)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; Department of Microbiology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Microbiology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong 
Kong, China.
(6)Department of Medicine and Geriatrics, United Christian Hospital, Hong Kong,
China.
(7)Department of Pathology, United Christian Hospital, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China.
(9)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; Department of Medicine and
Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
Hong Kong, China.
(10)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; Department of Microbiology,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. Electronic
address: paulkschan@cuhk.edu.hk.
(11)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory for
Digestive Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, Li Ka Shing Institute of
Health Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China;
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
siewchienng@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
(SARS-CoV-2) infects gastrointestinal tissues, little is known about the roles of
gut commensal microbes in susceptibility to and severity of infection. We
investigated changes in fecal microbiomes of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection
during hospitalization and associations with severity and fecal shedding of
virus.
METHODS: We performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing analyses of fecal samples
from 15 patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Hong Kong, from
February 5 through March 17, 2020. Fecal samples were collected 2 or 3 times per 
week from time of hospitalization until discharge; disease was categorized as
mild (no radiographic evidence of pneumonia), moderate (pneumonia was present),
severe (respiratory rate ≥30/min, or oxygen saturation ≤93% when breathing
ambient air), or critical (respiratory failure requiring mechanical ventilation, 
shock, or organ failure requiring intensive care). We compared microbiome data
with those from 6 subjects with community-acquired pneumonia and 15 healthy
individuals (controls). We assessed gut microbiome profiles in association with
disease severity and changes in fecal shedding of SARS-CoV-2.
RESULTS: Patients with COVID-19 had significant alterations in fecal microbiomes 
compared with controls, characterized by enrichment of opportunistic pathogens
and depletion of beneficial commensals, at time of hospitalization and at all
timepoints during hospitalization. Depleted symbionts and gut dysbiosis persisted
even after clearance of SARS-CoV-2 (determined from throat swabs) and resolution 
of respiratory symptoms. The baseline abundance of Coprobacillus, Clostridium
ramosum, and Clostridium hathewayi correlated with COVID-19 severity; there was
an inverse correlation between abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (an
anti-inflammatory bacterium) and disease severity. Over the course of
hospitalization, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides
massiliensis, and Bacteroides ovatus, which downregulate expression of
angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in murine gut, correlated inversely with
SARS-CoV-2 load in fecal samples from patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In a pilot study of 15 patients with COVID-19, we found persistent
alterations in the fecal microbiome during the time of hospitalization, compared 
with controls. Fecal microbiota alterations were associated with fecal levels of 
SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 severity. Strategies to alter the intestinal microbiota
might reduce disease severity.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.05.048 
PMCID: PMC7237927
PMID: 32442562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

