
1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2020 Jul-Sep;9(3):289-292. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_110_20.

Comparison of four agar media for the enumeration of the Mycobacterium abscessus 
complex.

Moore JE(1), Millar BC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Northern Ireland Public Health Laboratory,
Nightingale (Belfast City) Hospital; School of Biomedical Sciences, Ulster
University, Coleraine; School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Science, The 
Wellcome-Wolfson Institute for Experimental Medicine, Queen's University,
Belfast, Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

Background: Traditional culture of nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTMs) has
involved egg-based formulations (Lowenstein-Jensen medium) or defined media
(Middlebrook formulations), which have disadvantages of composition complexity,
availability, and cost. This study quantitatively compared three non-selective,
non-blood based basal agars with Columbia blood agar (CBA), to enumerate
Mycobacterium abscessus complex organisms in pure culture.
Methods: M. abscessus subsp. massiliense, M. abscessus subsp. bolletii, and M.
abscessus subsp. abscessus were employed. Inocula of each of these were counted
on three basal agar media, including (i) standard plate count agar (SPCA), (ii)
tryptone soya agar (TSA), and (iii) Mueller-Hinton agar (MHA) and compared to
counts on CBA.
Results: All NTM isolates of all subspecies grew successfully on all four media
examined. The growth was most profuse on SPCA, with a mean colony diameter of 3
mm, whereas the mean colony diameter on all other media was 1 mm. Statistically, 
there was no significant difference in counts when comparing CBA with SPCA or MHA
(P > 0.05), whereas there was a statistically significant difference between CBA 
and TSA (P = 0.01). There was no statistically significant difference between
SPCA and MHA (P = 0.53).
Conclusion: This study indicates that SPCA and MHA are equally effective as CBA, 
when enumerating of M. abscessus complex organisms. Employment of TSA gave
significantly lower counts than CBA (P = 0.01) and therefore should not be
employed when enumerating these organisms. SPCA yielded the most profuse growth
of all media examined. In addition to these advantages, given that SPCA does (i) 
not require blood as a medium constituent, (ii) is simple to reconstitute, (iii) 
is relatively cheap, and (iv) is widely available commercially, this study
endorses employment of SPCA for the nonselective culture of M. abscessus complex 
organisms, including enumeration.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_110_20 
PMID: 32862162 

Conflict of interest statement: None

