
1. Int J Mycobacteriol. 2020 Jan-Mar;9(1):71-75. doi: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_181_19.

Targeting bedaquiline mycobacterial efflux pump to potentially enhance therapy in
Mycobacterium abscessus.

Martin A(1), Bouyakoub Y(1), Soumillion K(1), Mantu EON(1), Colmant A(2),
Rodriguez-Villalobos H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Experimental and Clinical Research,
Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Université Catholique De Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.
(2)University Hospital Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium.

Background: Mycobacterium abscessus is notorious for being intrinsically
resistant to most antibiotics. Antibiotic efflux is one of the mechanisms used by
M. abscessus to pump out antibiotics from their cells. Inhibiting efflux pumps
(EPs) can be an attractive strategy to enhance the activity of drugs. The
objective of this study is to determine the activity of EP inhibitors (EPIs) to
enhance the efficacy of the new drug bedaquiline against M. abscessus clinical
isolates.
Methods: A total of 31 phenotypically and genotypically identified M. abscessus
subsp. abscessus, M. abscesss subsp. massiliense, and M. abscessus subsp.
bolletii clinical isolates were studied. The contribution of EPs was determined
by investigating the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) levels of bedaquiline
reduction in the absence and presence of EPIs verapamil and reserpine using the
resazurin microtiter assay.
Results: The observed bedaquiline MIC reduction by verapamil was observed in 100%
isolates and by reserpine in 54.8% isolates. Bedaquiline MIC was 4-32-fold using 
verapamil with M. abscessus subsp. bolletii showing the highest fold change and
between 2- and 4-fold using reserpine.
Conclusions: The results obtained in this study confirm that bedaquiline MIC
decreased in the presence of EPIs verapamil and reserpine in clinical isolates of
M. abscessus. Verapamil was the most effective EPI. As shown in previous studies,
verapamil may have clinical potential as adjunctive therapy to enhance the effect
of bedaquiline.

DOI: 10.4103/ijmy.ijmy_181_19 
PMID: 32474492 

Conflict of interest statement: None

