
1. mSphere. 2020 Mar 18;5(2). pii: e00058-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00058-20.

Isolation and Characterization of Ochrobactrum tritici for Penicillin V Potassium
Degradation.

Wang P(1)(2)(3), Shen C(2), Xu K(4), Cong Q(4), Dong Z(4), Li L(4), Guo J(4), Lu 
J(4), Liu S(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Chemical & Pharmaceutical Engineering, Hebei University of Science 
& Technology, Shijiazhuang, China pwang@hebust.edu.cn hebust_lsx@126.com.
(2)State Key Laboratory Breeding Base-Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Chemistry for Drug, Hebei University of Science & Technology, Shijiazhuang,
China.
(3)Hebei Province Pharmaceutical Chemical Engineering Technology Research Center,
Shijiazhuang, China.
(4)College of Chemical & Pharmaceutical Engineering, Hebei University of Science 
& Technology, Shijiazhuang, China.

Substantial concentrations of penicillin V potassium (PVK) have been found in
livestock manure, soil, and wastewater effluents, which may pose potential
threats to human health and contribute to the emergence of penicillin-resistant
bacterial strains. In this study, bacterial strains capable of degrading PVK were
isolated from sludge and characterized. Strain X-2 was selected for
biodegradation of PVK. Based on morphological observations and 16S rRNA gene
sequencing, strain X-2 was identified as an Ochrobactrum tritici strain. To
enhance the PVK degradation ability of PVK, a whole-cell biodegradation process
of Ochrobactrum tritici X-2 was established and optimized. In the whole-cell
biodegradation process, the optimal temperature and pH were 30°C and 7.0,
respectively. Under the optimized conditions, the degradation rate using
0.5 mg/ml PVK reached 100% within 3 h. During biodegradation, two major
metabolites were detected: penicilloic acid and phenolic acid. The present study 
provides a novel method for the biodegradation of PVK using Ochrobactrum tritici 
strains, which represent promising candidates for the industrial biodegradation
of PVK.IMPORTANCE Substantial concentrations of penicillin V potassium (PVK) have
been found in the environment, which may pose potential threats to human health
and contribute to the emergence of penicillin-resistant bacterial strains. In
this study, antibiotic-degrading bacterial strains for PVK were isolated from
sludge and characterized. Ochrobactrum tritici was selected for the
biodegradation of PVK with high efficiency. To enhance its PVK degradation
ability, a whole-cell biodegradation process was established and optimized using 
Ochrobactrum tritici The degradation rate with 0.5 mg/ml PVK reached 100% within 
3 h. The potential biodegradation pathway was also investigated. To the best of
our knowledge, the present study provides new insights into the biodegradation of
PVK using an Ochrobactrum tritici strain, a promising candidate strain for the
industrial biodegradation of β-lactam antibiotics.

Copyright © 2020 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00058-20 
PMCID: PMC7082136
PMID: 32188746 

