
1. Int Med Case Rep J. 2019 Oct 21;12:313-317. doi: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S224831.
eCollection 2019.

Imported Brucellosis In The Era Of Dramatically Increasing Immigrants And Foreign
Travelers From Endemic Areas: Occupational Hazards Of Secondary Infection Among
Laboratory Technicians In A Nonendemic Country.

Fukuchi T(1)(2), Yanagihara N(3), Imaoka K(4), Sugawara H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Medicine, Jichi Medical University Saitama Medical Center,
Omiya, Saitama, Japan.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine, Fukaya Red Cross Hospital, Fukaya,
Saitama, Japan.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Fukaya Red Cross Hospital, Fukaya, Saitama,
Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Reservoir Control of Zoonoses, Department of Veterinary Science,
National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan.

Background: Brucellosis, an important zoonotic disease, is endemic in various
parts of the world. Patients diagnosed with brucellosis in developed countries
are often travelers and immigrants from endemic areas. This pathogen is listed as
biosafety level 3, which means that it is highly contagious and therefore a risk 
to clinical laboratory technicians.
Case presentation: A 43-year-old Chinese man, who could not understand Japanese, 
visited our hospital because of an intermittent fever that had persisted for 5
months. Associated symptoms included muscle pain whenever he had a fever. He
reported currently working as a welder in Japan. However, his previous employment
working in animal husbandry in Heilongjiang, mainland China was not determined at
the initial visit owing to language barriers. Two sets of blood culture showed
nonfermenting gram-negative bacilli, initially misidentified as Ochrobactrum
anthropi and subsequently identified as Brucella abortus. Six-week doxycycline
and rifampicin were administered, with intravenous gentamicin for the initial 1
week. The patient recovered without relapse, confirmed by the negative result of 
a Brucella agglutination test. The patient's wife and three laboratory
technicians were required to undergo blood examinations, which revealed no
evidence of infection; however, they received prophylaxis with 3 weeks'
doxycycline and rifampicin.
Conclusion: In nonendemic countries, immigrants with imported brucellosis can be 
treated, to prevent secondary brucellosis infection, an occupational hazard among
laboratory technicians. Greater attention is needed for positive findings of
blood cultures, which may initially be misidentified as O. anthropi. When
providing medical care for immigrants with fever of unknown origin, it is
especially important for primary care physicians to overcome language barriers so
as to assess pertinent information regarding their home country, such as previous
employment, to prevent the spread the imported zoonoses in the era of a
dramatically increasing number of immigrants and foreign travelers.

© 2019 Fukuchi et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IMCRJ.S224831 
PMCID: PMC6814359
PMID: 31695516 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

