
1. J Endod. 2020 Aug;46(8):1105-1112. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2020.05.004. Epub 2020 Jun
1.

Next-Generation Sequencing to Assess Potentially Active Bacteria in Endodontic
Infections.

Nardello LCL(1), Amado PPP(2), Franco DC(3), Cazares RXR(1), Nogales CG(1), Mayer
MPA(2), Karygianni L(4), Thurnheer T(4), Pinheiro ET(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Institute of Environmental Sciences, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Clinic of Conservative and Preventive Dentistry, Center of Dental Medicine,
University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(5)Department of Dentistry, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, Brazil; Clinic of Conservative and Preventive Dentistry, Center of Dental 
Medicine, University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. Electronic address:
erickapinheiro@usp.br.

INTRODUCTION: Because active bacteria present a higher abundance of ribosomal RNA
(rRNA) than DNA (rRNA gene), the rRNA/DNA ratio of next-generation sequencing
(NGS) data was measured to search for active bacteria in endodontic infections.
METHODS: Paired complementary DNA and DNA samples from 5 root canals of teeth
with apical periodontitis were subjected to polymerase chain reaction with
bar-coded primers amplifying the 16S rRNA gene hypervariable regions V4-V5.
High-throughput sequencing was performed using MiSeq (Illumina, San Deigo, CA),
and data were analyzed using Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology and
Human Oral Microbiome Database. Statistical analysis was performed for relative
abundance of bacteria in the DNA- and rRNA-based NGS data using the Mann-Whitney 
test, whereas differences in the diversity and richness indexes were assessed
using a nonparametric 2-sample t test (P < .05). For bacterial taxa detected in
both approaches, the rRNA/DNA ratios were calculated by dividing the average
abundance of individual species in the respective analysis.
RESULTS: Although no significant difference was found in the indexes of bacterial
richness and diversity, the relative abundance of bacterial members varied in
both analyses. Comparing rRNA with DNA data, there was a significant decrease in 
the relative abundance of Firmicutes (P < .05). The bacterial taxa Bacteroidales 
[G-2] bacterium HMT 274, Porphyromonas endodontalis, Tannerella forsythia,
Alloprevotella tannerae, Prevotella intermedia, Pseudoramibacter alactolyticus,
Olsenella sp. HMT 809, Olsenella sp. HMT 939, Olsenella uli, and Fusobacterium
nucleatum subsp. animalis were both dominant (DNA ≥ 1%) and active (rRNA/DNA ≥
1).
CONCLUSIONS: The integrated DNA- and rRNA-based NGS strategy was particularly
important to disclose the activity of as-yet-uncultivated or difficult-to-culture
bacteria in endodontic infections.

Copyright © 2020 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2020.05.004 
PMID: 32497654  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

