
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Aug;64:102244. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102244. Epub 2020 Jul 
23.

First description of bacteremia caused by Oscillibacter valericigenes in a
patient hospitalized for leg amputation.

Broutin L(1), Deroche L(1), Michaud A(1), Le Moal G(2), Burucoa C(1), Gayet
LE(3), Plouzeau C(1), Pichon M(4).

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital of Poitiers, Bacteriology and Infection Control
Laboratory, Infectious Agents Department, Poitiers, France.
(2)University Hospital of Poitiers, Department of Infectious Diseases, CHU,
Poitiers, France.
(3)University Hospital of Poitiers, Department of Orthopedic Surgery and
Traumatology, CHU, Poitiers, France.
(4)University Hospital of Poitiers, Bacteriology and Infection Control
Laboratory, Infectious Agents Department, Poitiers, France. Electronic address:
maxime.pichon@chu-poitiers.fr.

Initially isolated from the alimentary canal of a Japanese corbicula clam,
Oscillibacter valericigenes is a Gram-negative rod, of which culture remains very
difficult. Herein we present the first case of bacteremia due to Oscillibacter
valericigenes, in humans. A 55-year-old man was hospitalized for clinical
management of multiple neglected leg wounds (colonized with maggots) that had
occurred during a motorcycle accident. Following radiological confirmation of the
bone infection, a transfemoral amputation was performed to limit the risk of
extended infection. During hospitalization, before the amputation, the patient
experienced fever, biological inflammation justifying the sampling of multiple
blood cultures. Anaerobic blood culture was positive after 34 hours, without
identification by routine procedure (MALDI-TOF), justifying identification by 16S
DNA sequencing. In the absence of possible subculture, antibiotic sensitivity
testing could not be performed. A pre-emptive treatment by
piperacillin-tazobactam was introduced for 14 days. The evolution was good,
except for a local disunion. Complete phylogenic analysis of the clinical strain 
showed that it significantly differed from the reference strain, which is
distantly related to the Clostridia cluster IV. Due to the culture conditions and
specialized identification method by sequencing, prevalence of O. valericigenes
may be underestimated. Optimization of blood culture procedures and utilization
of 16S rRNA gene sequencing are tools needed for identification of rare pathogens
that could help to optimize clinical management of infected patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102244 
PMID: 32712374 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

