
1. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2020 May;88(5):579-587. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000002612.

The gut microbiome distinguishes mortality in trauma patients upon admission to
the emergency department.

Burmeister DM(1), Johnson TR, Lai Z, Scroggins SR, DeRosa M, Jonas RB, Zhu C,
Scherer E, Stewart RM, Schwacha MG, Jenkins DH, Eastridge BJ, Nicholson SE.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Trauma and Emergency Surgery, Department of Surgery
(D.M.B., T.R.J., S.S., M.D., R.B.J., C.Z., E.S., R.M.S., M.G.S., D.H.J., B.J.E., 
S.E.N.), Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute (Z.L.), and Department of
Molecular Medicine (Z.L.), UT Health San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas; Department 
of Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (D.M.B),
Bethesda, MD and US Army Institute of Surgical Research (D.M.B., S.E.N.), Fort
Sam Houston, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Traumatic injury can lead to a compromised intestinal epithelial
barrier, decreased gut perfusion, and inflammation. While recent studies indicate
that the gut microbiome (GM) is altered early following traumatic injury, the
impact of GM changes on clinical outcomes remains unknown. Our objective of this 
follow-up study was to determine if the GM is associated with clinical outcomes
in critically injured patients.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective, observational study in adult patients (N =
67) sustaining severe injury admitted to a level I trauma center. Fecal specimens
were collected on admission to the emergency department, and microbial DNA from
all samples was analyzed using the Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology
pipeline and compared against the Greengenes database. α-Diversity and
β-diversity were estimated using the observed species metrics and analyzed with t
tests and permutational analysis of variance for overall significance, with post 
hoc pairwise analyses.
RESULTS: Our patient population consisted of 63% males with a mean age of 44
years. Seventy-eight percent of the patients suffered blunt trauma with 22%
undergoing penetrating injuries. The mean body mass index was 26.9 kg/m.
Significant differences in admission β-diversity were noted by hospital length of
stay, intensive care unit hospital length of stay, number of days on the
ventilator, infections, and acute respiratory distress syndrome (p < 0.05).
β-Diversity on admission differed in patients who died compared with patients who
lived (mean time to death, 8 days). There were also significantly less
operational taxonomic units in samples from patients who died versus those who
survived. A number of species were enriched in the GM of injured patients who
died, which included some traditionally probiotic species such as Akkermansia
muciniphilia, Oxalobacter formigenes, and Eubacterium biforme (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Gut microbiome diversity on admission in severely injured patients is
predictive of a variety of clinically important outcomes. While our study does
not address causality, the GM of trauma patients may provide valuable diagnostic 
and therapeutic targets for the care of injured patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic and epidemiological, level III.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000002612 
PMID: 32039976  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

