
1. Urolithiasis. 2020 Aug;48(4):285-301. doi: 10.1007/s00240-020-01182-x. Epub 2020 
Mar 2.

Nutrients, vitamins, probiotics and herbal products: an update of their role in
urolithogenesis.

Pedro RN(1)(2), Aslam AU(1)(3), Bello JO(1)(4), Bhatti KH(1)(5), Philipraj
J(1)(6), Sissoko I(1)(7), Vasconcellos GS(2), Trinchieri A(1), Buchholz N(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)U-Merge Ltd. (Urology for Emerging Countries), London, UK.
(2)Division of Urology, Faculdade de Medicina São Leopoldo Mandic de Campinas,
Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Urology, Letterkenny University Hospital, Saolta Healthcare
Group, Donegal, Ireland.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Ilorin Teaching Hospital, Ilorin,
Nigeria.
(5)Urology Department, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(6)Department of Urology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(7)Urology, Faculty of Medicine and Odontostomatology, University of Sciences,
Techniques and Technologies, Bamako, Mali.
(8)U-Merge Ltd. (Urology for Emerging Countries), London, UK.
noor.buchholz@gmail.com.
(9)Sobeh's Vascular and Medical Center, U-Merge Ltd, Building 73, 3rd floor,
Dubai Health Care City, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. noor.buchholz@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Urolithiasis. 2020 Apr 28;:.

Nutrients, vitamins, probiotics, and herbal products may be risk factors, or
alternately, protect against the formation of urinary stones. The purpose of this
review was to update knowledge of the role of nutraceuticals in renal stone
formation. A systematic search of the relevant literature published in PubMed in 
the last ten years was conducted and a narrative review of the data from the
included studies was done. Search screened 513 studies that were reduced to 34
after evaluation by title and abstract; other 38 studies were retrieved by
references of the selected studies. Beverages high fluid intake confirmed
protective effect; orange juice protective effect; apple or grapefruit juice not 
confirmed as risk factors; sugar-sweetened soda and punch increased risk of stone
formation. Energy intake: very high energy intake increased risk factor for women
(especially after menopause); dietary acid load increased risk at equal levels of
energy intake. Macronutrients confirmed increased risk of high protein intake.
Calcium and Oxalate: calcium intake protective effect; oxalate intake only modest
increase of risk in men and older women. Metal cations zinc and iron intake no
clear impact on the risk of stone formation, dietary copper increased risk;
manganese intake reduced risk of stone formation. Fruits and Vegetables decreased
risk. Vitamins B6 intake not associated to risk of stone formation; vitamin C
intake increased risk in men; vitamin D or supplemental vitamin D intake not
associated to increased risk in men and younger women, suggestion of a higher
risk in older women; Probiotics Gut colonization with Oxalobacter formigenes
associated to lower risk of stone formation, effect of oxalate-degraders
probiotics on urinary oxalate equivocal. Herbal products efficacy of some herbal 
products demonstrated in some trials, more investigations needed to confirm their
efficacy and safety.

DOI: 10.1007/s00240-020-01182-x 
PMID: 32123972 

