
1. mSphere. 2020 Jan 22;5(1). pii: e00739-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00739-19.

Paenibacillus odorifer, the Predominant Paenibacillus Species Isolated from Milk 
in the United States, Demonstrates Genetic and Phenotypic Conservation of
Psychrotolerance but Clade-Associated Differences in Nitrogen Metabolic Pathways.

Beno SM(#)(1), Cheng RA(#)(1), Orsi RH(1), Duncan DR(2), Guo X(1), Kovac J(1)(3),
Carroll LM(1), Martin NH(1), Wiedmann M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Agrotechnology and Food Science, Wageningen University,
Wageningen, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Food Science, Pennsylvania State University, State College,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Food Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
mw16@cornell.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Paenibacillus is a spore-forming bacterial genus that is frequently isolated from
fluid milk and is proposed to play a role in spoilage. To characterize the
genetic and phenotypic diversity of Paenibacillus spp., we first used rpoB
allelic typing data for a preexisting collection of 1,228 Paenibacillus species
isolates collected from raw and processed milk, milk products, and dairy
environmental sources. Whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and average nucleotide
identity by BLAST (ANIb) analyses performed for a subset of 58 isolates
representing unique and overrepresented rpoB allelic types in the collection
revealed that these isolates represent 21 different Paenibacillus spp., with P.
odorifer being the predominant species. Further genomic characterization of P.
odorifer isolates identified two distinct phylogenetic clades, clades A and B,
which showed significant overrepresentation of 172 and 164 ortholog clusters and 
94 and 52 gene ontology (GO) terms, respectively. While nitrogen fixation genes
were found in both clades, multiple genes associated with nitrate and nitrite
reduction were overrepresented in clade A isolates; additional phenotypic testing
demonstrated that nitrate reduction is specific to isolates in clade A. Hidden
Markov models detected 9 to 10 different classes of cold shock-associated genetic
elements in all P. odorifer isolates. Phenotypic testing revealed that all
isolates tested here can grow in skim milk broth at 6°C, suggesting that
psychrotolerance is conserved in P. odorifer Overall, our data suggest that
Paenibacillus spp. isolated from milk in the United States represent broad
genetic diversity, which may provide challenges for targeted-control strategies
aimed at reducing fluid milk spoilage.IMPORTANCE Although Paenibacillus species
isolates are frequently isolated from pasteurized fluid milk, the link between
the genetic diversity and phenotypic characteristics of these isolates was not
well understood, especially as some Bacillales isolated from milk are unable to
grow at refrigeration temperatures. Our data demonstrate that Paenibacillus spp. 
isolated from fluid milk represent tremendous interspecies diversity, with P.
odorifer being the predominant Paenibacillus sp. isolated. Furthermore, genetic
and phenotypic data support that P. odorifer is well suited to transition from a 
soil-dwelling environment, where nitrogen fixation (and other nitrate/nitrite
reduction pathways present only in clade A) may facilitate growth, to fluid milk,
where its multiple cold shock-associated adaptations enable it to grow at
refrigeration temperatures throughout the storage of milk. Therefore, efforts to 
reduce bacterial contamination of milk will require a systematic approach to
reduce P. odorifer contamination of raw milk.

Copyright © 2020 Beno et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00739-19 
PMCID: PMC7407005
PMID: 31969477 

