
1. PLoS One. 2020 Jan 31;15(1):e0228108. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228108.
eCollection 2020.

Community-intrinsic properties enhance keratin degradation from bacterial
consortia.

Nasipuri P(1), Herschend J(1), Brejnrod AD(2), Madsen JS(1), Espersen R(3),
Svensson B(3), Burmølle M(1), Jacquiod S(1), Sørensen SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Microbiology, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Novo Nordic Foundation Center For Basic Metabolic Research, University of
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)DTU Bioengineering, Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.

Although organic matter may accumulate sometimes (e.g. lignocellulose in peat
bog), most natural biodegradation processes are completed until full
mineralization. Such transformations are often achieved by the concerted action
of communities of interacting microbes, involving different species each
performing specific tasks. These interactions can give rise to novel
"community-intrinsic" properties, through e.g. activation of so-called "silent
genetic pathways" or synergistic interplay between microbial activities and
functions. Here we studied the microbial community-based degradation of keratin, 
a recalcitrant biological material, by four soil isolates, which have previously 
been shown to display synergistic interactions during biofilm formation;
Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, Xanthomonas retroflexus, Microbacterium oxydans and 
Paenibacillus amylolyticus. We observed enhanced keratin weight loss in cultures 
with X. retroflexus, both in dual and four-species co-cultures, as compared to
expected keratin degradation by X. retroflexus alone. Additional community
intrinsic properties included accelerated keratin degradation rates and increased
biofilm formation on keratin particles. Comparison of secretome profiles of X.
retroflexus mono-cultures to co-cultures revealed that certain proteases (e.g.
serine protease S08) were significantly more abundant in mono-cultures, whereas
co-cultures had an increased abundance of proteins related to maintaining the
redox environment, e.g. glutathione peroxidase. Hence, one of the mechanisms
related to the community intrinsic properties, leading to enhanced degradation
from co-cultures, might be related to a switch from sulfitolytic to proteolytic
functions between mono- and co-cultures, respectively.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0228108 
PMCID: PMC6994199
PMID: 32004342  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

