
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Sep 7. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10805. [Epub ahead of print]

Characterization of a novel antifungal protein produced by Paenibacillus polymyxa
isolated from the wheat rhizosphere.

Ran J(1), Jiao L(1), Zhao R(1), Zhu M(1), Shi J(2), Xu B(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Food Science, Henan Institute of Science and Technology, Xinxiang,
Henan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Food Safety, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Science, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(3)College of Food and Bioengineering, Henan University of Science and
Technology, Luoyang, Henan, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Fusarium head blight (FHB) is one of the disasters that seriously
harm wheat and other small grain crops in the world, it causes spoilage and
mildew of the grain leading to a significant decline in the yield and quality of 
the grain. This research aimed to isolate antagonistic bacteria to purify
antifungal protein. A strain was isolated from the rhizosphere of healthy wheat
in a wheat field affected by a severe FHB epidemic. This isolated strain was
tentatively identified as Paenibacillus polymyxa 7F1, which displayed a strong
inhibitory effect against several other pathogens. One novel antifungal protein
was purified from the P. polymyxa 7F1 and successfully expressed.
RESULTS: A crude culture of P. polymyxa 7F1 demonstrated antifungal activity that
was stable at a temperature range of 60-90 °C and a pH range of 2.6-9.0. However,
the antifungal activity of the P. polymyxa 7F1 was inhibited upon proteinase K,
trypsin, and neutral protease treatments. A 36 kDa protein with broad-spectrum
antifungal activities was purified from the P. polymyxa 7F1. A glycosyl hydrolase
domain was identified from this protein via LC-MS analyses. A recombinant plasmid
pET32a(+)/36kd for prokaryotic expression was constructed, and the renatured
p36kd protein demonstrated similar antifungal activity as the 36 kDa protein
purified from the P. polymyxa 7F1.
CONCLUSION: A novel antifungal protein produced by P. polymyxa 7F1 was purified
and expressed, the recombinant protein showed good antifungal activity as the
novel purified protein. The novel antifungal protein provides an effective way to
control the Fusarium head blight. This article is protected by copyright. All
rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10805 
PMID: 32895910 

