
1. Insects. 2020 Jun 15;11(6). pii: E373. doi: 10.3390/insects11060373.

Susceptibility of Red Mason Bee Larvae to Bacterial Threats Due to Microbiome
Exchange with Imported Pollen Provisions.

Voulgari-Kokota A(1)(2)(3), Steffan-Dewenter I(4), Keller A(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am Hubland,
97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(2)Center for Computational and Theoretical Biology, Biocenter, University of
Würzburg, Hubland Nord, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Current Address: Faculty of Science and Engineering, Groningen Institute for
Evolutionary Life Sciences, Nijenborgh 7, 9747 AG Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Animal Ecology and Tropical Biology, Biocenter, University of
Würzburg, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

Solitary bees are subject to a variety of pressures that cause severe population 
declines. Currently, habitat loss, temperature shifts, agrochemical exposure, and
new parasites are identified as major threats. However, knowledge about
detrimental bacteria is scarce, although they may disturb natural microbiomes,
disturb nest environments, or harm the larvae directly. To address this gap, we
investigated 12 Osmia bicornis nests with deceased larvae and 31 nests with
healthy larvae from the same localities in a 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene
metabarcoding study. We sampled larvae, pollen provisions, and nest material and 
then contrasted bacterial community composition and diversity in healthy and
deceased nests. Microbiomes of pollen provisions and larvae showed similarities
for healthy larvae, whilst this was not the case for deceased individuals. We
identified three bacterial taxa assigned to Paenibacillus sp. (closely related to
P. pabuli/amylolyticus/xylanexedens), Sporosarcina sp., and Bacillus sp. as
indicative for bacterial communities of deceased larvae, as well as Lactobacillus
for corresponding pollen provisions. Furthermore, we performed a provisioning
experiment, where we fed larvae with untreated and sterilized pollens, as well as
sterilized pollens inoculated with a Bacillus sp. isolate from a deceased larva. 
Untreated larval microbiomes were consistent with that of the pollen provided.
Sterilized pollen alone did not lead to acute mortality, while no microbiome was 
recoverable from the larvae. In the inoculation treatment, we observed that
larval microbiomes were dominated by the seeded bacterium, which resulted in
enhanced mortality. These results support that larval microbiomes are strongly
determined by the pollen provisions. Further, they underline the need for further
investigation of the impact of detrimental bacterial acquired via pollens and
potential buffering by a diverse pollen provision microbiome in solitary bees.

DOI: 10.3390/insects11060373 
PMCID: PMC7348846
PMID: 32549328 

