
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2020 Aug;47(8):6445-6449. doi: 10.1007/s11033-020-05663-5. Epub
2020 Jul 22.

WGS-based characterization of the potentially beneficial Enterococcus faecium EFD
from a beehive.

Dimov SG(1), Guyrova A(2), Vladimirova A(2), Dimitrov M(2), Peykov S(2), Strateva
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Genetics, Sofia University "St. Kliment
Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria. svetoslav@biofac.uni-sofia.bg.
(2)Faculty of Biology, Department of Genetics, Sofia University "St. Kliment
Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology, Medical University - 
Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Nowadays, due to their potential application as probiotics for humans or animals,
many beneficial lactic acid bacteria have been isolated from different natural
environments. These include members of the genus Enterococcus - quite specific
due to their ambiguous nature, varying from pathogens to probiotics. In our work 
we present a whole-genome sequencing (WGS)-based approach for assessing the
potential of bacteriocin-producing Enterococcus isolates from beehives to serve
as natural preserving agents against bacterial infections associated with
honeybees. Potential Enterococcus spp. isolates from pollen granules were tested 
with the well diffusion assay for bacteriocin activity against Paenibacillus
larvae, the causative agent of the American foulbrood disease (AFB). Two of them 
gave positive results and were determined at species level by 16S rRNA genes
sequencing. They were then subjected to WGS using the Illumina HiSeq platform.
The resulting raw data reads were processed and further analyzed by using only
freely available web-based tools (the Shovill pipeline, QUAST, BAGEL4, ResFinder,
VirulenceFinder and PlasmidFinder). The analysis revealed that both of them
represent clonally identical isolates of the same strain. This specific strain
was named Enterococcus faecium EFD, and was genotyped by the MLST-2.0 Server.
Five bacteriocin genes were found in the assembled genome, providing a possible
explanation for the antimicrobial properties of the isolate. The protein nature
of the inhibitory agent/s was confirmed by treatment with proteinase K. No
resistance determinants for clinically important antibiotics and functional
virulence factor genes were detected. The bioinformatic analyses of the draft
genome sequence suggest that E. faecium EFD is not pathogenic.The observation
that E. faecium EFD was present within more than one of the beehives in the
apiary proposes the idea that E. faecium EFD is there as a part of the normal
beehive microbiota. This finding, in combination with its antibacterial activity 
against P. larvae, highlights this novel isolate as a potential natural
preserving agent against AFB. Furthermore, the WGS-based approach reported here
proved to be very cost- and time- efficient, for screening the applicability of
new pro- and prebiotic Enterococcus strains as beehive protection agents.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-020-05663-5 
PMID: 32696346 

