
1. Sci Total Environ. 2020 Jul 1;724:138127. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138127.
Epub 2020 Mar 21.

Towards Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture: An evaluation of biocontrol effects,
nutritional value, and ecological impact of bacterial inoculants.

Passera A(1), Vacchini V(2), Cocetta G(1), Shahzad GI(1), Arpanahi AA(1), Casati 
P(1), Ferrante A(1), Piazza L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences - Production, Landscape,
Agroenergy, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Environmental Science and Policy, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Environmental Science and Policy, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: laura.piazza@unimi.it.

Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture (NSA) is a novel concept in agriculture that
considers not only yield, but also nutritional value of produce, sustainability
of production, and ecological impact of agriculture. In accordance with its
goals, NSA would benefit from applying microbial-based products as they are
deemed more sustainable than their synthetic counterparts. This study
characterized 3 plant-beneficial bacterial strains (Paenibacillus pasadenensis
strain R16, Pseudomonas syringae strain 260-02, Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strain
CC2) on their biocontrol activity and effect on nutritional and texture quality
of romaine lettuce plants (Lactuca sativa) in greenhouse. The pathogens used in
the trials are Rhizoctonia solani and Pythium ultimum. The obtained results
indicate that strain R16 had a significant ability to cause a statistically
significant reduction in the symptoms caused by both P. ultimum (reduction of
32%) and R. solani (reduction of 42%), while the other two strains showed a less 
efficient biocontrol ability. Indices of the nutritional quality (content in
phenols, carotenoids and chlorophyll) were unaffected by the treatments,
indicating that the product was equivalent to that obtained without using the
bacteria, while the texture of the leaves benefits from the biocontrol
treatments. In particular, the mechanical resistance of the leaves was
significantly higher in non-treated plants affected by R. solani but was restored
to the values of healthy plants when the bacterial inoculants were present as
well. The ecological impact was evaluated by characterizing the bacterial
microbiota in bulk soil, rhizosphere, and root in the presence or absence of the 
inoculants. The composition of the microbiota, analyzed with a Unifrac model to
describe beta-diversity, was radically different in the rhizosphere and the root 
endosphere among treatments, while the bulk soil formed a single cluster
regardless of treatment, indicating that the use of these treatments did not have
an ecological impact outside of the plant.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138127 
PMID: 32272400  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

