
1. BMC Ecol. 2020 Mar 6;20(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s12898-020-00283-w.

American foulbrood in a honeybee colony: spore-symptom relationship and
feedbacks.

Stephan JG(1)(2), de Miranda JR(3), Forsgren E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 750 07,
Uppsala, Sweden. jorg.stephan@slu.se.
(2)Swedish Species Information Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, 750 07, Uppsala, Sweden. jorg.stephan@slu.se.
(3)Department of Ecology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, 750 07,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Erratum in
    BMC Ecol. 2020 Mar 23;20(1):16.

BACKGROUND: The most severe bacterial disease of honeybees is American foulbrood 
(AFB). The epidemiology of AFB is driven by the extreme spore resilience, the
difficulty of bees to remove these spores, and the considerable incidence of
undetected spore-producing colonies. The honeybee collective defence mechanisms
and their feedback on colony development, which involves a division of labour at 
multiple levels of colony organization, are difficult to model. To better predict
disease outbreaks we need to understand the feedback between colony development
and disease progression within the colony. We therefore developed Bayesian models
with data from forty AFB-diseased colonies monitored over an entire foraging
season to (i) investigate the relationship between spore production and symptoms,
(ii) disentangle the feedback loops between AFB epidemiology and natural colony
development, and (iii) discuss whether larger insect societies promote or limit
within-colony disease transmission.
RESULTS: Rather than identifying a fixed spore count threshold for clinical
symptoms, we estimated the probabilities around the relationship between spore
counts and symptoms, taking into account modulators such as brood amount/number
of bees and time post infection. We identified a decrease over time in the
bees-to-brood ratio related to disease development, which should ultimately
induce colony collapse. Lastly, two contrasting theories predict that larger
colonies could promote either higher (classical epidemiological SIR-model) or
lower (increasing spatial nest segregation and more effective pathogen removal)
disease prevalence.
CONCLUSIONS: AFB followed the predictions of the SIR-model, partly because
disease prevalence and brood removal are decoupled, with worker bees acting more 
as disease vectors, infecting new brood, than as agents of social immunity, by
removing infected brood. We therefore established a direct link between disease
prevalence and social group size for a eusocial insect. We furthermore provide a 
probabilistic description of the relationship between AFB spore counts and
symptoms, and how disease development and colony strength over a season modulate 
this relationship. These results help to better understand disease development
within honeybee colonies, provide important estimates for further epidemiological
modelling, and gained important insights into the optimal sampling strategy for
practical beekeeping and honeybee research.

DOI: 10.1186/s12898-020-00283-w 
PMCID: PMC7060557
PMID: 32143610  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

