
1. J Invertebr Pathol. 2020 May;172:107357. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2020.107357. Epub
2020 Mar 19.

European Foulbrood in stingless bees (Apidae: Meliponini) in Brazil: Old disease,
renewed threat.

Teixeira ÉW(1), Ferreira EA(2), Luz CFPD(3), Martins MF(4), Ramos TA(2), Lourenço
AP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório Especializado de Sanidade Apícola (LASA)/Instituto
Biológico/APTA/SAA-SP, Pindamonhangaba, SP, Brazil. Electronic address:
erica@biologico.sp.gov.br.
(2)Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia do Espírito Santo - Campus
Santa Teresa, ES, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Botânica, Núcleo de Pesquisa em Palinologia, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(4)EMBRAPA Gado de Leite - Laboratório de Genética Molecular, Juiz de Fora, MG,
Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal dos Vales do
Jequitinhonha e Mucuri, Diamantina, MG, Brazil. Electronic address:
anete.lourenco@ufvjm.edu.br.

Stingless bees (Apidae: Meliponini) are a group of bees with vestigial stings
showing a high level of social organization. They are important pollinators in
tropical and subtropical regions, and, in the last decades, stingless beekeeping 
has increased rapidly in Brazil. Bee-collected pollen and honey of Apis mellifera
can be an important source of disease when used as supplements to feed stingless 
bee colonies, a common and increasing practice adopted by stingless beekeepers.
Here, we aimed to investigate the presence of pathogens commonly found in honey
bees in diseased colonies of Melipona species in Espírito Santo and São Paulo
States, Southeast Brazil. We detected, for the first time, the bacterium
Melissococcus plutonius and symptoms of European foulbrood in Melipona spp.,
associated with brood death and colony losses in some cases. In addition, we
tested for the presence of the bacterium Paenibacillus larvae and the fungus
Aschosphaera apis, as well as the six more common honey bee viruses in Brazil
(BQCV, ABPV, DWV, KBV, IAPV, CBPV) and the microsporidia Nosema apis and Nosema
ceranae. However, only one sample of brood was infected with N. ceranae and all
other pathogens, with the exception of Melissococcus plutonius, were absent in
the analyzed brood. Lastly, we looked for toxic pollen in all food fed to
diseased colonies, but none was present.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jip.2020.107357 
PMID: 32201239 

