
1. Int J Med Microbiol. 2020 Feb;310(2):151394. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2020.151394.
Epub 2020 Jan 16.

Discovery of Paenibacillus larvae ERIC V: Phenotypic and genomic comparison to
genotypes ERIC I-IV reveal different inventories of virulence factors which
correlate with epidemiological prevalences of American Foulbrood.

Beims H(1), Bunk B(2), Erler S(3), Mohr KI(4), Spröer C(2), Pradella S(2),
Günther G(5), Rohde M(4), von der Ohe W(6), Steinert M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany;
Lower Saxony State Office for Consumer Protection and Food Safety, Institute of
Apiculture, Celle, Germany.
(2)Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(3)Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg, Institut für Biologie-Zoologie,
Halle, Germany.
(4)Central Facility for Microscopy, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
Department Microbial Drugs, Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany.
(6)Lower Saxony State Office for Consumer Protection and Food Safety, Institute
of Apiculture, Celle, Germany.
(7)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Germany.
Electronic address: m.steinert@tu-bs.de.

Paenibacillus larvae is the etiological agent of American Foulbrood (AFB), a
highly contagious brood disease of honey bees (Apis mellifera). AFB requires
mandatory reporting to the veterinary authority in many countries and until now
four genotypes, P. larvae ERIC I-IV, have been identified. We isolated a new
genotype, ERIC V, from a Spanish honey sample. After a detailed phenotypic
comparison with the reference strains of the ERIC I-IV genotypes, including spore
morphology, non-ribosomal peptide (NRP) profiling, and in vivo infections of A.
mellifera larvae, we established a genomic DNA Macrorestriction Fragment Pattern 
Analysis (MRFPA) scheme for future epidemiologic discrimination. Whole genome
comparison of the reference strains and the new ERIC V genotype (DSM 106052)
revealed that the respective virulence gene inventories of the five genotypes
corresponded with the time needed to kill 100 % of the infected bee larvae
(LT100) in in vivo infection assays. The rarely isolated P. larvae genotypes ERIC
II I-V with a fast-killing phenotype (LT100 3 days) harbor genes with high
homology to virulence factors of other insect pathogens. These virulence genes
are absent in the epidemiologically prevalent genotypes ERIC I (LT100 12 days)
and ERIC II (LT100 7 days), which exhibit slower killing phenotypes. Since
killing-retardation is known to reduce the success of hygienic cleaning by nurse 
bees, the identified absence of virulence factors might explain the
epidemiological prevalences of ERIC genotypes. The discovery of the P. larvae
ERIC V isolate suggests that more unknown ERIC genotypes exist in bee colonies.
Since inactivation or loss of a few genes can transform a fast-killing phenotype 
into a more dangerous slow-killing phenotype, these rarely isolated genotypes may
represent a hidden reservoir for future AFB outbreaks.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2020.151394 
PMID: 31959580 

