
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jun 2;86(12). pii: e02275-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02275-19. Print 2020 Jun 2.

The Homogalacturonan Deconstruction System of Paenibacillus amylolyticus 27C64
Requires No Extracellular Pectin Methylesterase and Has Significant Industrial
Potential.

Keggi C(1), Doran-Peterson J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA
chris.keggi@uga.edu jpeterso@uga.edu.

Paenibacillus amylolyticus 27C64, a Gram-positive bacterium with diverse plant
cell wall polysaccharide deconstruction capabilities, was isolated previously
from an insect hindgut. Previous work suggested that this organism's pectin
deconstruction system differs from known systems in that its sole pectin
methylesterase is cytoplasmic, not extracellular. In this work, we have
characterized the specific roles of key extracellular pectinases involved in
homogalacturonan deconstruction, including four pectate lyases and one pectin
lyase. We show that one newly characterized pectate lyase, PelC, has a novel
substrate specificity, with a lower Km for highly methylated pectins than for
polygalacturonic acid. PelC works synergistically with PelB, a high-turnover
exo-pectate lyase that releases Δ4,5-unsaturated trigalacturonate as its major
product. It is likely that PelC frees internal stretches of demethylated
homogalacturonan which PelB can degrade. We also show that the sole pectin lyase 
has a high k cat value and rapidly depolymerizes methylated substrates. Three
cytoplasmic GH105 hydrolases were screened for the ability to remove terminal
unsaturated galacturonic acid residues from oligogalacturonide products produced 
by the action of extracellular lyases, and we found that two are active on
demethylated oligogalacturonides. This work confirms that efficient
homogalacturonan deconstruction in P. amylolyticus 27C65 does not require
extracellular pectin methylesterase activity. Three of the extracellular lyases
studied in this work are also thermostable, function well over a broad pH range, 
and have significant industrial potential.IMPORTANCE Pectin is an important
structural polysaccharide found in most plant cell walls. In the environment,
pectin degradation is part of the decomposition process that turns over dead
plant material and is important to organisms that feed on plants. Industrially,
pectinases are used to improve the quality of fruit juices and can also be used
to process coffee cherries or tea leaves. These enzymes may also prove useful in 
reducing the environmental impact of paper and cotton manufacturing. This work is
significant because it focuses on a Gram-positive bacterium that is
evolutionarily distinct from other well-studied pectin-degrading organisms and
differs from known systems in key ways. Most importantly, a simplified
extracellular deconstruction process in this organism is able to break down
pectins without first removing the methyl groups that inhibit other systems.
Moreover, some of the enzymes described here have the potential to improve
industrial processes that rely on pectin deconstruction.

Copyright © 2020 Keggi and Doran-Peterson.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02275-19 
PMCID: PMC7267202
PMID: 32303547 

