
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Oct 1. doi: 10.1111/mec.15657. [Epub ahead of print]

Gut microbiota degrades toxic isothiocyanates in a flea beetle pest.

Shukla SP(1)(2), Beran F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology,
Hans-Knoell-Strasse 8, 07745, Jena, Germany.
(2)Research Group Sequestration and Detoxification in Insects, Max Planck
Institute for Chemical Ecology, Hans-Knoell-Strasse 8, 07745, Jena, Germany.

Microbial symbionts of herbivorous insects have been suggested to aid in the
detoxification of plant defense compounds; however, quantitative studies on
microbial contribution to plant toxin degradation remain scarce. Here, we
demonstrate microbiome-mediated degradation of plant-derived toxic
isothiocyanates in the cabbage stem flea beetle Psylliodes chrysocephala, a major
pest of oilseed rape. Suppression of microbiota in antibiotic-fed beetles
resulted in up to 11.3-fold higher levels of unmetabolized isothiocyanates
compared to control beetles but did not affect other known detoxification
pathways in P. chrysocephala. We characterized the microbiome of
laboratory-reared and field-collected insects using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing 
and isolated bacteria belonging to the three core genera Pantoea, Acinetobacter
and Pseudomonas. Only Pantoea isolates rapidly degraded isothiocyanates in vitro,
and restored isothiocyanate degradation in vivo when reintroduced in
antibiotic-fed beetles. Pantoea was consistently present across beetle life
stages and in field and lab populations. In addition, Pantoea was also detected
in undamaged tissues of the host plant Brassica rapa, indicating that P.
chrysocephala could possibly acquire an isothiocyanate detoxifying bacterium
through their diet. Our results demonstrate that both insect endogenous
mechanisms and the microbiota can contribute to the detoxification of plant
defense compounds and together they can better account for the fate of ingested
plant metabolites.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15657 
PMID: 33006166 

