
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Sep 14;8(9). pii: E1414. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8091414.

Response of Barley Plants to Drought Might Be Associated with the Recruiting of
Soil-Borne Endophytes.

Yang L(1), Schröder P(1), Vestergaard G(2), Schloter M(1), Radl V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Research Unit Comparative Microbiome Analysis,
Ingolstädterlandstr. 1, 85764 Oberschleißheim, Germany.
(2)Section for Bioinformatics, Department of Health Technology, Technical
University of Denmark, DK-2800 Lyngby, Denmark.

Mechanisms used by plants to respond to water limitation have been extensively
studied. However, even though the inoculation of beneficial microbes has been
shown to improve plant performance under drought stress, the inherent role of
soil microbes on plant response has been less considered. In the present work, we
assessed the importance of the soil microbiome for the growth of barley plants
under drought stress. Plant growth was not significantly affected by the
disturbance of the soil microbiome under regular watering. However, after drought
stress, we observed a significant reduction in plant biomass, particularly of the
root system. Plants grown in the soil with disturbed microbiome were
significantly more affected by drought and did not recover two weeks after
re-watering. These effects were accompanied by changes in the composition of
endophytic fungal and bacterial communities. Under natural conditions,
soil-derived plant endophytes were major colonizers of plant roots, such as
Glycomyces and Fusarium, whereas, for plants grown in the soil with disturbed
microbiome seed-born bacterial endophytes, e.g., Pantoea, Erwinia, and
unclassified Pseudomonaceae and fungal genera normally associated with
pathogenesis, such as Gibberella and Gaeumannomyces were observed. Therefore, the
role of the composition of the indigenous soil microbiota should be considered in
future approaches to develop management strategies to make plants more resistant 
towards abiotic stress, such as drought.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8091414 
PMID: 32937884 

