
1. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2020 Jul 24. pii: S1083-8791(20)30453-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.07.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Baseline Gut Microbiota Composition Is Associated with Major Infections Early
after Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.

Murthy HS(1), Gharaibeh RZ(2), Al-Mansour Z(1), Kozlov A(3), Trikha G(4), Newsome
RC(5), Gauthier J(5), Farhadfar N(1), Wang Y(6), Kelly DL(7), Lybarger J(4),
Jobin C(2), Wang GP(3), Wingard JR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida; UF Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, 
Florida.
(2)UF Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, Florida; Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida.
(3)Division of Infectious Disease and Global Medicine, Department of Medicine,
University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida.
(6)Division of Quantitative Sciences And Biostatistics, University of Florida
Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, Florida.
(7)UF Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, Florida; College of Nursing, University 
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida.
(8)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida; UF Health Cancer Center, Gainesville, 
Florida. Electronic address: wingajr@ufl.edu.

Infection is a major cause of morbidity and mortality after hematopoietic cell
transplantation (HCT). Gut microbiota (GM) composition and metabolites provide
colonization resistance against dominance of potential pathogens, and GM
dysbiosis following HCT can be deleterious to immune reconstitution. Little is
known about the composition, diversity, and evolution of GM communities in HCT
patients and their association with subsequent febrile neutropenia (FN) and
infection. Identification of markers before HCT that predict subsequent infection
could be useful in developing individualized antimicrobial strategies. Fecal
samples were collected prospectively from 33 HCT recipients at serial time
points: baseline, post-conditioning regimen, neutropenia onset, FN onset (if
present), and hematologic recovery. GM was assessed by 16S rRNA sequencing. FN
and major infections (ie, bloodstream infection, typhlitis, invasive fungal
infection, pneumonia, and Clostridium difficile enterocolitis) were identified.
Significant shifts in GM composition and diversity were observed during HCT, with
the largest alterations occurring after initiation of antibiotics. Loss of
diversity persisted without a return to baseline at hematologic recovery. GM in
patients with FN was enriched in Mogibacterium, Bacteroides fragilis, and
Parabacteroides distasonis, whereas increased abundance of Prevotella,
Ruminococcus, Dorea, Blautia, and Collinsella was observed in patients without
fever. A baseline protective GM profile (BPGMP) was predictive of protection from
major infection. The BPGMP was associated with subsequent major infections with
77% accuracy and an area under the curve of 79%, with sensitivity, specificity,
and positive and negative predictive values of 0.71, 0.91, 0.77, and 0.87,
respectively. Our data show that large shifts in GM composition occur early after
HCT, and differences in baseline GM composition are associated with the
development of subsequent major infections.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbmt.2020.07.023 
PMID: 32717434 

