
1. Food Funct. 2020 Sep 23;11(9):7892-7904. doi: 10.1039/d0fo01103g.

In vitro fermentation outcomes of arabinoxylan and galactoxyloglucan depend on
fecal inoculum more than substrate chemistry.

Feng G(1), Mikkelsen D(1), Hoedt EC(2), Williams BA(1), Flanagan BM(1), Morrison 
M(3), Gidley MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Nutrition and Food Sciences, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture
and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 4072, Australia.
m.gidley@uq.edu.au.
(2)Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, 4072, Australia. m.morrison@uq.edu.au and APC Microbiome Ireland,
University College Cork, Cork, T12, Ireland.
(3)Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, 4072, Australia. m.morrison@uq.edu.au.

Using in vitro fermentation conditions, this study investigated the fermentation 
characteristics of arabinoxylan (AX) and xyloglucan (XG) with a fecal inoculum
that was collected either from humans consuming unrestricted diets or pigs fed a 
semi-defined diet with cellulose being the sole non-starch polysaccharide for 10 
days prior to fecal collection. Metagenomic analysis revealed that microbial
communities in the two types of inoculum were distinctively different, which led 
to distinct fermentation characteristics with the polysaccharides. The microbial 
communities fermented with the porcine fecal inoculum were clustered according to
the fermentation time, while those fermented with the human fecal inoculum were
differentiated by the substrates. Using the porcine fecal inoculum, irrespective 
of the substrates, Prevotella copri and the unclassified lineage rc4-4 were the
dominant operational taxonomic units (OTUs) promoted during fermentation.
Fermentation of wheat AX (WAX) and galacto-XG (GXG) with the human fecal
inoculum, however, promoted different OTUs, except for a shared OTU belonging to 
Lachnospiraceae. Specifically, WAX promoted the growth of Bacteroides plebeius
and a Blautia sp., while GXG promoted an unclassified Bacteroidales,
Parabacteroides distasonis, Bacteroides uniformis and Bacteroides sp. 2. These
changes in bacterial communities were in accordance with the short chain fatty
acid (SCFA) production, where comparable SCFA profiles were obtained from the
porcine fecal fermentation while different amounts and proportions of SCFA were
acquired from fermentation of WAX and GXG with the human fecal inoculum.
Altogether, this study indicated that the starting inoculum composition had a
greater effect than polysaccharide chemistry in driving fermentation outcomes.

DOI: 10.1039/d0fo01103g 
PMID: 32813756 

