
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Jan;158(1):238-252. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.09.023.
Epub 2019 Oct 1.

Mutated CEACAMs Disrupt Transforming Growth Factor Beta Signaling and Alter the
Intestinal Microbiome to Promote Colorectal Carcinogenesis.

Gu S(1), Zaidi S(1), Hassan MI(2), Mohammad T(2), Malta TM(3), Noushmehr H(3),
Nguyen B(4), Crandall KA(4), Srivastav J(5), Obias V(6), Lin P(6), Nguyen BN(1), 
Yao M(7), Yao R(8), King CH(8), Mazumder R(8), Mishra B(1), Rao S(1), Mishra
L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Medicine, Department of Surgery, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC.
(2)Centre for Interdisciplinary Research in Basic Sciences, Jamia Millia Islamia,
Jamia Nagar, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, Michigan.
(4)Computational Biology Institute and Department of Biostatistics and
Bioinformatics, Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC.
(5)University of Toledo College of Medicine, Toledo, Ohio.
(6)Department of Surgery, The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington,
DC.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, The George Washington
University, Washington, DC.
(9)Center for Translational Medicine, Department of Surgery, The George
Washington University, Washington, DC; Department of Gastroenterology, Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Washington, DC. Electronic address:
lmishra@email.gwu.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: We studied interactions among proteins of the carcinoembryonic
antigen-related cell adhesion molecule (CEACAM) family, which interact with
microbes, and transforming growth factor beta (TGFB) signaling pathway, which is 
often altered in colorectal cancer cells. We investigated mechanisms by which
CEACAM proteins inhibit TGFB signaling and alter the intestinal microbiome to
promote colorectal carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We collected data on DNA sequences, messenger RNA expression levels, and
patient survival times from 456 colorectal adenocarcinoma cases, and a separate
set of 594 samples of colorectal adenocarcinomas, in The Cancer Genome Atlas. We 
performed shotgun metagenomic sequencing analyses of feces from wild-type mice
and mice with defects in TGFB signaling (Sptbn1+/- and Smad4+/-/Sptbn1+/-) to
identify changes in microbiota composition before development of colon tumors.
CEACAM protein and its mutants were overexpressed in SW480 and HCT116 colorectal 
cancer cell lines, which were analyzed by immunoblotting and proliferation and
colony formation assays.
RESULTS: In colorectal adenocarcinomas, high expression levels of genes encoding 
CEACAM proteins, especially CEACAM5, were associated with reduced survival times 
of patients. There was an inverse correlation between expression of CEACAM genes 
and expression of TGFB pathway genes (TGFBR1, TGFBR2, and SMAD3). In colorectal
adenocarcinomas, we also found an inverse correlation between expression of genes
in the TGFB signaling pathway and genes that regulate stem cell features of
cells. We found mutations encoding L640I and A643T in the B3 domain of human
CEACAM5 in colorectal adenocarcinomas; structural studies indicated that these
mutations would alter the interaction between CEACAM5 and TGFBR1. Overexpression 
of these mutants in SW480 and HCT116 colorectal cancer cell lines increased their
anchorage-independent growth and inhibited TGFB signaling to a greater extent
than overexpression of wild-type CEACAM5, indicating that they
are gain-of-function mutations. Compared with feces from wild-type mice, feces
from mice with defects in TGFB signaling had increased abundance of bacterial
species that have been associated with the development of colon tumors, including
Clostridium septicum, and decreased amounts of beneficial bacteria, such as
Bacteroides vulgatus and Parabacteroides distasonis.
CONCLUSION: We found expression of CEACAMs and genes that regulate stem cell
features of cells to be increased in colorectal adenocarcinomas and inversely
correlated with expression of TGFB pathway genes. We found colorectal
adenocarcinomas to express mutant forms of CEACAM5 that inhibit TGFB signaling
and increase proliferation and colony formation. We propose that CEACAM proteins 
disrupt TGFB signaling, which alters the composition of the intestinal microbiome
to promote colorectal carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2019.09.023 
PMCID: PMC7124154 [Available on 2021-01-01]
PMID: 31585122  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

