
1. Fertil Steril. 2020 Jun;113(6):1286-1298.e4. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2020.01.027.

Metagenomic analysis identified microbiome alterations and pathological
association between intestinal microbiota and polycystic ovary syndrome.

Chu W(1), Han Q(1), Xu J(1), Wang J(1), Sun Y(1), Li W(1), Chen ZJ(2), Du Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.
(2)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China; National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive
Technology and Reproductive Genetics, Key Laboratory for Reproductive
Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Center for Reproductive Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: duyz@sjtu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To identify different microbial species in women with polycystic ovary
syndrome (PCOS) and reveal a possible relationship between gut dysbiosis and
pathological changes.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Academic institution.
PATIENT(S): Reproductive-aged women with PCOS (n = 14) and controls (n = 14) from
the Centre for Reproductive Medicine.
INTERVENTION(S): Shotgun metagenomic sequencing on fecal samples from patients,
and clinical parameters (including body mass index, endocrine hormone levels, and
glycemia level) gathered for correlation analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Identification of different gut microbial strains and
relativity between microbiota and clinical parameters.
RESULT(S): We found several microbial strains were statistically significantly
more abundant in the PCOS group, including Parabacteroides merdae, Bacteroides
fragilis, and strains of Escherichia and Shigella, whereas Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii was enriched in the control group. Metagenomic species (MGS) analysis
revealed that the microbes of the PCOS group were negatively correlated with
those of the control group. Of note, we observed a positive correlation between
MGS relevant to PCOS and endocrine disorders, including body mass index and
elevated levels of serum testosterone, luteinizing hormone, and antimüllerian
hormone. Functional alterations, reflected by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes orthologues, could imply potential mechanisms of microbial involvement in
the developmental progress of PCOS.
CONCLUSION(S): Our findings suggest an intimate association and potential
mechanisms linking microbial dysbiosis and the pathophysiologic changes of PCOS. 
We address the importance of monitoring and modulating microbial composition and 
functional shifts in future clinical practice.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2020.01.027 
PMID: 32482258 

