
1. Nutrients. 2020 Aug 27;12(9). pii: E2610. doi: 10.3390/nu12092610.

Differences in Gut Microbiome Composition between Senior Orienteering Athletes
and Community-Dwelling Older Adults.

Fart F(1), Rajan SK(1), Wall R(1), Rangel I(1), Ganda-Mall JP(1)(2), Tingö L(1), 
Brummer RJ(1), Repsilber D(1), Schoultz I(1), Lindqvist CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Örebro University,
702 81 Örebro, Sweden.
(2)Laboratory of Translational Mucosal Immunology, Digestive Diseases Research
Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
08035 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal (GI) health is an important aspect of general
health. Gastrointestinal symptoms are of specific importance for the elderly, an 
increasing group globally. Hence, promoting the elderly's health and especially
gastrointestinal health is important. Gut microbiota can influence
gastrointestinal health by modulation of the immune system and the gut-brain
axis. Diverse gut microbiota have been shown to be beneficial; however, for the
elderly, the gut microbiota is often less diverse. Nutrition and physical
activity, in particular, are two components that have been suggested to influence
composition or diversity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we compared gut microbiota between two
groups of elderly individuals: community-dwelling older adults and physically
active senior orienteering athletes, where the latter group has less
gastrointestinal symptoms and a reported better well-being. With this approach,
we explored if certain gut microbiota were related to healthy ageing. The
participant data and faecal samples were collected from these two groups and the 
microbiota was whole-genome sequenced and taxonomically classified with
MetaPhlAn.
RESULTS: The physically active senior orienteers had a more homogeneous
microbiota within the group and a higher abundance of Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii compared to the community-dwelling older adults. Faecalibacterium
prausnitzii has previously shown to have beneficial properties. Senior orienteers
also had a lower abundance of Parasutterella excrementihominis and Bilophila
unclassified, which have been associated with impaired GI health. We could not
observe any difference between the groups in terms of Shannon diversity index.
Interestingly, a subgroup of community-dwelling older adults showed an atypical
microbiota profile as well as the parameters for gastrointestinal symptoms and
well-being closer to senior orienteers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest specific composition characteristics of healthy 
microbiota in the elderly, and show that certain components of nutrition as well 
as psychological distress are not as tightly connected with composition or
diversity variation in faecal microbiota samples.

DOI: 10.3390/nu12092610 
PMID: 32867153 

