
1. J Periodontal Implant Sci. 2020 May 18;50(3):171-182. doi:
10.5051/jpis.2020.50.3.171. eCollection 2020 Jun.

Salivary microbiota in periodontal health and disease and their changes following
nonsurgical periodontal treatment.

Ko Y(1), Lee EM(1), Park JC(2), Gu MB(3), Bak S(4), Ji S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University
of Korea College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Oral Histology, Seoul National University School of Dentistry,
Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Korea University College of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Oral Health Science, Ajou
University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Purpose: The aims of this study were to examine the salivary microbiota in
conditions of periodontal health and disease and to explore microbial changes
following nonsurgical periodontal treatment.
Methods: Non-stimulated saliva samples were collected from 4 periodontally
healthy participants at baseline and from 8 patients with chronic periodontitis
at baseline and 3 months following nonsurgical periodontal therapy. The V3 and V4
regions of the 16S rRNA gene from the DNA of saliva samples were amplified and
sequenced. The salivary microbial compositions of the healthy participants and
patients with periodontitis prior to and following nonsurgical treatment of
periodontitis were compared based on the relative abundance of various taxa.
Results: On average, 299 operational taxonomic units were identified in each
sample. The phylogenetic diversity in patients with periodontitis was higher than
that in healthy participants and decreased following treatment. The abundance of 
the phylum Spirochaetes and the genus Treponema in patients with periodontitis
was 143- and 134-fold higher than in the healthy control group, respectively, but
decreased significantly following treatment. The species that were overabundant
in the saliva of patients with periodontitis included the Peptostreptococcus
stomatis group, Porphyromonas gingivalis, the Fusobacterium nucleatum group,
Parvimonas micra, Porphyromonas endodontalis, Filifactor alocis, and Tannerella
forsythia. The phylum Actinobacteria, the genus Streptococcaceae_uc, and the
species Streptococcus salivarius group were more abundant in healthy participants
than in those with periodontitis. There was a trend toward a decrease in
disease-associated taxa and an increase in health-associated taxa following
treatment.
Conclusions: Our results revealed differences in the taxa of salivary microbiota 
between conditions of periodontal health and disease. The taxa found to be
associated with health or disease have potential for use as salivary biomarkers
for periodontal health or disease.

Copyright © 2020. Korean Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.5051/jpis.2020.50.3.171 
PMCID: PMC7321711
PMID: 32617182 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported.

