
1. Clin Oral Investig. 2020 Aug 28. doi: 10.1007/s00784-020-03510-2. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Microbiological analysis of endodontically treated teeth with apical
periodontitis before and after endodontic retreatment.

Barbosa-Ribeiro M(1)(2), Arruda-Vasconcelos R(1), Louzada LM(1), Dos Santos
DG(3), Andreote FD(3), Gomes BPFA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Endodontics, Piracicaba
Dental School, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Av. Limeira 901, Bairro
Areao, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Endodontics School of Dentistry , University Center UniRuy-
Wyden , BA, Salvador, Brazil.
(3)Department of Soil Science, Luiz de Queiroz College of Agriculture, University
of São Paulo (USP), Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(4)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Endodontics, Piracicaba
Dental School, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Av. Limeira 901, Bairro
Areao, Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil. bpgomes@fop.unicamp.br.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the microbiota of teeth with endodontic treatment
failure by 16S ribosomal RNA genetic sequencing (GS) and PCR at the different
phases of the endodontic retreatment and to associate the presence of specific
bacteria with clinical and radiographic features in teeth with apical
periodontitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Twenty infected root canals of single-rooted teeth were
selected. Samples were collected with sterile paper points before
chemo-mechanical preparation (CMP) (S1), after CMP (S2) and after 30 days of
intracanal medication (ICM) (S3). Microbial identification was performed using GS
and PCR. Tukey-Kramer post hoc test and post hoc ANOVA were used for intergroup
analysis. Paired t test and repeated-measures ANOVA were applied for intragroup
analysis, at a significance level of 5%.
RESULTS: A total of 89 strains were identified using GS. Sixty-five strains were 
recovered in S1 and 15 strains in S2, and 9 strains remained in S3. Enterococcus 
faecalis was the most predominant bacteria. Gram-positive cocci bacteria
predominated. Gram-negative species were also detected. Using species-specific
PCR primers to detect seven species, the most prevalent ones at all the phases of
the endodontic retreatment were E. faecalis and Porphyromonas gingivalis.
However, Parvimonas micra and P. gingivalis were associated with previous pain,
P. gingivalis was associated with tenderness to percussion and E. faecalis,
Fusobacterium nucleatum and P. gingivalis were associated with periapical lesion 
> 3 mm.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the microbiota of persistent infection is
polymicrobial with predominance of E. faecalis and P. gingivalis in all phases of
the endodontic retreatment, regardless of the method used for microbial
identification. Associations were found between specific bacteria and
clinical/radiographic features.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The characterization of the bacteria present at all phases of
the endodontic retreatment is important for the monitoring of the effectiveness
of the techniques used and to better understand the susceptibility of these
species to the disinfection agent used during the procedures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00784-020-03510-2 
PMID: 32860137 

