
1. PLoS One. 2020 May 20;15(5):e0233170. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233170.
eCollection 2020.

MinION Sequencing of colorectal cancer tumour microbiomes-A comparison with
amplicon-based and RNA-Sequencing.

Taylor WS(1), Pearson J(2), Miller A(3), Schmeier S(4), Frizelle FA(1), Purcell
RV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Biostatistics and Computational Biology Unit, University of Otago,
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)Gene Structure and Function Laboratory, University of Otago, Christchurch, New
Zealand.
(4)Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Massey University, Auckland,
New Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence suggests a role for the gut microbiome in the
development and progression of many diseases and many studies have been carried
out to analyse the microbiome using a variety of methods. In this study, we
compare MinION sequencing with meta-transcriptomics and amplicon-based sequencing
for microbiome analysis of colorectal tumour tissue samples.
METHODS: DNA and RNA were extracted from 11 colorectal tumour samples. 16S rRNA
amplicon sequencing and MinION sequencing was carried out using genomic DNA, and 
RNA-Sequencing for meta-transcriptomic analysis. Non-human MinION and
RNA-Sequencing reads, and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing reads were taxonomically
classified using a database built from available RefSeq bacterial and archaeal
genomes and a k-mer based algorithm in Kraken2. Concordance between the three
platforms at different taxonomic levels was tested on a per-sample basis using
Spearman's rank correlation.
RESULTS: The average number of reads per sample using RNA-Sequencing was greater 
than 129 times that generated using MinION sequencing. However, the average read 
length of MinION sequences was more than 13 times that of RNA or 16S rRNA
amplicon sequencing. Taxonomic assignment using 16S sequencing was less reliable 
beyond the genus level, and both RNA-Sequencing and MinION sequencing could
detect greater numbers of phyla and genera in the same samples, compared to 16S
sequencing. Bacterial species associated with colorectal cancer, Fusobacterium
nucleatum, Parvimonas micra, Bacteroides fragilis and Porphyromonas gingivalis,
were detectable using MinION, RNA-Sequencing and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing
data.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-read sequences generated using MinION sequencing can compensate
for low numbers of reads for bacterial classification. MinION sequencing can
discriminate between bacterial strains and plasmids and shows potential as a
cost-effective tool for rapid microbiome sequencing in a clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0233170 
PMCID: PMC7239435
PMID: 32433701  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

