
1. J Endod. 2020 Aug 5. pii: S0099-2399(20)30574-4. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2020.07.028.
[Epub ahead of print]

Immunomodulation Mediated by Azithromycin in Experimental Periapical
Inflammation.

Andrada AC(1), Azuma MM(2), Furusho H(3), Hirai K(4), Xu S(5), White RR(6),
Sasaki H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endodontics, Department of Essentials and Simulation, University
of Detroit Mercy School of Dentistry, Detroit, Michigan; Division of Endodontics,
Department of Restorative Dentistry and Biomaterials Sciences, Harvard School of 
Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, University of
Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109.
(3)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Pathobiology, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, University of
Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; Department of Immunology
and Infectious Diseases, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts;
Department of Periodontics and Endodontics, Okayama University School of
Dentistry, Kitaku, Okayama, Japan.
(5)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, The Forsyth Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts; Functional Genomics Laboratory, Channing Division of
Network Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.
(6)Division of Endodontics, Department of Restorative Dentistry and Biomaterials 
Sciences, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(7)Department of Cariology, Restorative Sciences and Endodontics, University of
Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; Department of Immunology
and Infectious Diseases, The Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts;
Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: hajimes@umich.edu.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of the present study was to compare the
immunomodulatory effect of azithromycin (AZM), ampicillin (AMP), amoxicillin
(AMX), and clindamycin (CLI) in vitro and AZM on preexisting periapical lesions
compared with AMP.
METHODS: The susceptibility of 4 common human endodontic pathogens (Parvimonas
micra, Streptococcus intermedius, Prevotella intermedia, and Fusobacterium
nucleatum) to AZM, AMP, AMX, and CLI was confirmed by agar disk diffusion assay. 
Preexisting periapical lesions in C57BL/6J mice were treated with AZM, AMP, or
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Periapical bone healing and the pattern of
inflammatory cell infiltration were evaluated after a 10-day treatment by
micro-computed tomographic and histology, respectively. Besides, the effect of
antibiotics in pathogen-stimulated nuclear factor kappa B activation and the
production of interleukin 1 alpha and tumor necrosis factor alpha was assessed
in vitro by luciferase assay and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: All examined endodontic pathogens were susceptible to AZM, AMP, AMX, and
CLI. AZM significantly attenuated periapical bone loss versus PBS. PBS resulted
in widely diffused infiltration of mixed inflammatory cells. By contrast, AZM
brought about localized infiltration of neutrophils and M2 macrophages and
advanced fibrosis. Although the effect of AMP on bone was uncertain, inflammatory
cell infiltration was considerably milder than PBS. However, most macrophages
observed seemed to be M1 macrophages. AZM suppressed pathogen-stimulated nuclear 
factor kappa B activation and cytokine production, whereas AMP, AMX, and CLI
reduced only cytokine production moderately.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that AZM led to the resolution of preexisting
experimental periapical inflammation. Our data provide a perspective on host
response in antibiotic selection for endodontic treatment. However, well-designed
clinical trials are necessary to better elucidate the benefits of AZM as an
adjunctive therapy for endodontic treatment when antibiotic therapy is
recommended. Although both AZM and AMP were effective on preexisting periapical
lesions, AZM led to advanced wound healing, probably depending on its
immunomodulatory effect.

Copyright © 2020 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joen.2020.07.028 
PMID: 32763436 

