
1. J Periodontol. 2020 Mar 31. doi: 10.1002/JPER.19-0586. [Epub ahead of print]

Do patients with aggressive and chronic periodontitis exhibit specific
differences in the subgingival microbial composition? A systematic review.

Montenegro SCL(1), Retamal-Valdes B(1), Bueno-Silva B(1), Duarte PM(1)(2), Faveri
M(1), Figueiredo LC(1), Feres M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Dental Research Division, Guarulhos University, 
Guarulhos, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Periodontology, School of Advanced Dental Sciences, College of
Dentistry, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The 2017 World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and
Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions grouped the diseases previously recognized
as chronic (CP) or aggressive (AgP) periodontitis under a single category named
periodontitis. The rationale for this decision was the lack of specific patterns 
of immune-inflammatory response or microbial profiles associated with CP or AgP. 
However, no previous studies have compiled the results of all studies comparing
subgingival microbial data between these clinical conditions. Thus, this
systematic review aimed to answer the following focused question: "Do patients
with AgP periodontitis present differences in the subgingival microbiota when
compared with patients with CP?"
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted according to the PRISMA statement. The
MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane databases were searched up to June 2019 for studies
of any design (except case reports, case series, and reviews) comparing
subgingival microbial data from patients with CP and AgP.
RESULTS: A total of 488 articles were identified and 56 were included. Thirteen
studies found Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans elevated in AgP in comparison
with CP, while Fusobacterium nucleatum, Parvimonas micra, and Campylobacter
rectus were elevated in AgP in a few studies. None of these species were elevated
in CP. However, the number of studies not showing statistically significant
differences between CP and AgP was always higher than that of studies showing
differences.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested an association of A. actinomycetemcomitans
with AgP, but neither this species nor the other species studied to date were
unique to or could differentiate between CP and AgP (PROSPERO #CRD42016039385).

© 2020 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.19-0586 
PMID: 32233092 

