
1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2020 Mar;99(10):e18954. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000018954.

Brain abscess in a patient with psoriatic arthritis treated with adalimumab: A
case report.

Lo YP(1)(2), Desale S(1), Wu PY(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, China Medical University Hospital.
(2)Department of Dermatology, China Medical University, Taiwan, ROC.

RATIONALE: In patients receiving biological therapies, serious infections are a
major concern. Infections associated with anti-tumor necrosis factor antibody
therapy include tuberculosis, viral, fungal, and bacterial infections. Likewise, 
severe infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract, lung, skin and soft
tissue, urinary tract, gastrointestinal tract, joint, and bone have also been
reported previously. However, infections involving the central nervous system are
rare, especially an intracranial infection caused by odontogenic infection. To
date, only few cases have been reported of this infection. This is the first case
of a patient with psoriatic arthritis receiving adalimumab and developing brain
abscess of odontogenic origin.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 39-year-old male with psoriatic arthritis receiving
adalimumab treatment came to the emergency department with initial presentation
of sudden onset convulsions. He had been receiving adalimumab treatment for 1
month. Two days after the third injection, the patient had an episode of
sudden-onset general convulsion for nearly 5 min with the upgazing and general
tonic presentation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed left frontal lobe
brain abscess. Pus culture from the brain abscess detected Streptococcus
sanguinis (S. sanguinis), Fusobacterium nucleatum (F. nucleatum), and Parvimonas 
micra (P. micra).
DIAGNOSIS: Brain abscess with odontogenic infection.
INTERVENTIONS: The patient received left frontal craniotomy, abscess drainage and
systemic empiric antibiotics treatment with vancomycin, cefepime, and
metronidazole. Due to drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms during
the treatment, vancomycin and metronidazole were discontinued, and systemic
antibiotics were switched to teicoplanin and ceftriaxone.
OUTCOMES: A brain MRI follow-up performed after 1 month of initial treatment
revealed the reduced size of the abscess lesion and minimal oedema. The patient
was discharged with stable condition.
LESSONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of a patient with
psoriatic arthritis receiving adalimumab and developing brain abscess of
odontogenic origin. Such a rare diagnosis must be kept in mind when patients
treated with adalimumab present with sudden-onset convulsions. Careful dental
examination should be performed before administration of adalimumab.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000018954 
PMCID: PMC7478459
PMID: 32150046  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

