
1. Surg Neurol Int. 2020 Jun 6;11:140. doi: 10.25259/SNI_20_2020. eCollection 2020.

Parvimonas micra: A potential causative pathogen to consider when diagnosing
odontogenic brain abscesses.

Prieto R(1), Callejas-Díaz A(2), Hassan R(1), de Vargas AP(3), López-Pájaro
LF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery, Puerta de Hierro University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain.
(2)Departments of Internal Medicine, Puerta de Hierro University Hospital,
Madrid, Spain.
(3)Neurophysiology, Puerta de Hierro University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

Background: Brain abscess is a life-threatening entity which requires prompt and 
long-term antibiotic therapy, generally associated with surgical drainage, and
eradicating the primary source of infection. Parvimonas micra (Pm) has only been 
reported once before as the lone infecting organism of an orally originated,
solitary brain abscess. Diagnosing brain abscesses caused by this Gram-positive
anaerobic coccus, constituent of the oral cavity flora, is challenging, and an
optimal treatment regimen has not been well established. We report the diagnosis 
and successful treatment of a Pm caused odontogenic brain abscess.
Case Description: A 62-year-old immunocompetent male with a right-parietal brain 
abscess presented with headache and seizures. He was started on empirical
antibiotic therapy and subsequently underwent surgical drainage. The only source 
of infection found was severe periodontitis with infected mandibular cysts. Thus,
tooth extraction and cyst curettage were performed 1 week after brain surgery.
Cultures of brain abscess fluid were negative, but amplification of bacterial 16S
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) with polymerase chain reaction demonstrated Pm. After 3
weeks of intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole, the patient was switched to
oral metronidazole and moxifloxacin for 6 weeks.
Conclusions: This case highlights the potential risk of untreated dental
infections causing brain abscesses. Pm should be considered as a possible
pathogen of odontogenic brain abscesses despite its presence usually not being
detected by standard bacterial cultures. Therefore, 16S rRNA gene sequencing
analysis is strongly recommended for bacterial identification before defining
brain abscesses as cryptogenic.

Copyright: © 2020 Surgical Neurology International.

DOI: 10.25259/SNI_20_2020 
PMCID: PMC7294173
PMID: 32547827 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

