
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Jun 17. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09640-z.
[Epub ahead of print]

Probiotics: an Antibiotic Replacement Strategy for Healthy Broilers and
Productive Rearing.

Neveling DP(1), Dicks LMT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1,
Matieland, Stellenbosch, 7602, South Africa.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Stellenbosch University, Private Bag X1,
Matieland, Stellenbosch, 7602, South Africa. lmtd@sun.ac.za.

Pathogens develop resistance to antibiotics at a rate much faster than the
discovery of new antimicrobial compounds. Reports of multidrug-resistant bacteria
isolated from broilers, and the possibility that these strains may spread
diseases amongst humans, prompted many European countries to ban the inclusion of
antibiotics in feed. Probiotics added to broiler feed controlled a number of
bacterial infections. A combination of Enterococcus faecium, Pediococcus
acidilactici, Bacillus animalis, Lactobacillus salivarius and Lactobacillus
reuteri decreased the colonisation of Campylobacter jejuni and Salmonella
Enteritidis in the gastro-intestinal tract (GIT) of broilers, whereas Bacillus
subtilis improved feed conversion, intestinal morphology, stimulated the immune
system and inhibited the colonisation of Campylobacter jejuni, Escherichia coli
and Salmonella Minnesota. Lactobacillus salivarius and Pediococcus parvulus
improved weight gain, bone characteristics, intestinal morphology and immune
response, and decreased the colonisation of S. Enteritidis. Lactobacillus
crispatus, L. salivarius, Lactobacillus gallinarum, Lactobacillus johnsonii,
Enterococcus faecalis and Bacillus amyloliquefaciens decreased the Salmonella
count and led to an increase in lysozyme and T lymphocytes. Probiotics may also
improve feed digestion through production of phytases, lipases, amylases and
proteases or stimulate the GIT to secrete digestive enzymes. Some strains
increase the nutritional value of feed by production of vitamins,
exopolysaccharides and antioxidants. Bacteriocins, if produced, regulate pathogen
numbers in the GIT and keep pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory reactions in
balance.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09640-z 
PMID: 32556932 

