
1. Front Physiol. 2020 Feb 6;11:65. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00065. eCollection 2020.

Identification of Serum-Based Metabolic Feature and Characteristic Metabolites in
Paraquat Intoxicated Mouse Models.

Yu Y(1), Gao Z(2), Lou J(1), Mao Z(1), Li K(1), Chu C(1), Hu L(1), Li Z(1), Deng 
C(1), Fan H(1), Chen P(1), Huang H(1), Yu Y(1), Ding J(1), Li D(1), Chen F(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, School of Basic Medical Science, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Clinical Acupuncture and Moxibustion Department, Second School of Clinical
Medicine, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Targeted Intervention of Cardiovascular Disease,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cardiovascular Disease Translational
Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

Paraquat (PQ) is a widely used herbicide which can cause high mortality to
humans. However, relatively few studies focus on metabolic feature of PQ
intoxication for investigating the underlying mechanisms. Here we performed
non-targeted metabolomics profiling of serum samples from acute and chronic PQ
intoxicated mouse models by gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(GC-TOF/MS) to identify metabolic feature and characteristic metabolites of acute
and chronic PQ intoxication. Results showed that 3-indolepropionic acid (IPA) and
pathway of glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism were significantly altered
after acute PQ intoxication; 2-hydroxybutyric acid and the ratio of
L-serine/glycine were of significance between acute and chronic PQ intoxication. 
Then targeted metabolomics profiling was conducted by liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis to confirm the changes of IPA after acute PQ
intoxication. Moreover, IPA-producing gut bacteria in feces were quantified by
qRT-PCR to explain the varied IPA serum concentration. Clostridium botulinum and 
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius were significantly suppressed after acute PQ
intoxication. The data suggested that PQ caused oxidative damage partially
through suppression of anti-oxidative metabolite producing gut bacteria. In
conclusion, we identified characteristic metabolites and pathway of acute and
chronic PQ intoxication which could be potential biomarkers and therapeutic
targets.

Copyright © 2020 Yu, Gao, Lou, Mao, Li, Chu, Hu, Li, Deng, Fan, Chen, Huang, Yu, 
Ding, Li and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00065 
PMCID: PMC7017841
PMID: 32116775 

