
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Apr;62:102152. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102152. Epub 2020 Jan 
28.

Sonicate fluid inoculated into blood culture bottles does not improve diagnosis
of periprosthetic joint infection caused by anaerobes. A retrospective analysis.

Rieber H(1), Frontzek A(2), Alefeld M(3), Heinrich S(3), Barden B(3), Jerosch
J(4), Breil-Wirth A(4), Schmitt H(5), Ulatowski M(6), Götz S(7), Mullahi A(8),
Fischer M(9), Weber R(10), Pfander D(11), Sakkal A(12), Kukuk P(13), Bell A(14).

Author information: 
(1)MVZ Dr. Stein and Colleagues, Division of Microbiology, Mönchengladbach,
Germany. Electronic address: hrieber@labor-stein.de.
(2)MVZ Dr. Stein and Colleagues, Division of Microbiology, Mönchengladbach,
Germany.
(3)Krankenhaus Düren, Klinik für Unfall- und Orthopädische Chirurgie, Düren,
Germany.
(4)Johanna-Etienne-Krankenhaus, Division of Orthopedics, Neuss, Germany.
(5)LVR-Klinik for Orthopedic Surgery, Viersen, Germany.
(6)Sana Krankenhaus, Abteilung für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie, Radevormwald, 
Germany.
(7)Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Klinik für Unfallchirurgie und Orthopädie, Herne,
Germany.
(8)St. Josef-Krankenhaus, Abteilung für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie, Linnich, 
Germany.
(9)Johanniter Hospital, Department of Orthopedics, General and Accident Surgery, 
Duisburg, Germany.
(10)St. Marien-Hospital, Klinik für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie, Oberhausen,
Germany.
(11)Krankenhaus Neuwerk, Klinik für Orthopädie, Unfallchirurgie und
Wirbelsäulentherapie, Mönchengladbach, Germany.
(12)Hermann-Josef-Krankenhaus, Klinik für Unfall- und Orthopädische Chirurgie,
Erkelenz, Germany.
(13)Malteser-Krankenhaus St. Anna, Klinik für Orthopädie und Unfallchirurgie,
Duisburg, Germany.
(14)Marienkrankenhaus, Division of Orthopedics, Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: In microbiological diagnosis of periprosthetic joint infection (PJI) 
there is much controversial discussion about culture media and incubation time,
especially if anaerobic bacteria are the causative agents. This retrospective
analysis was conducted to compare the results obtained by inoculation of sonicate
fluid from prosthetic components into BD Bactec blood culture bottles with those 
obtained by our culture method using sensitive supplemented growth media.
METHODS: Twenty-eight cases were included in this study. For definition of PJI,
the criteria of the Musculoskeletal Infection Society (MSIS) were considered. The
quantity and time to positivity of anaerobes detected in sonicate fluid were
monitored both from inoculated supplemented liver thioglycollate broth and
anaerobic blood culture bottles. Furthermore, phenotypic testing was performed on
the antimicrobial activity within the sonicate fluid.
RESULTS: The most frequently isolated microbes were Cutibacterium species,
followed by Finegoldia magna, Parvimonas micra, Robinsoniella peoriensis,
Clostridium species, Peptoniphilus harei and Slackia exigua. In 24 cases, the
microorganisms became detectable within five days (median time 3.2 days) when
sonicate fluid was incubated in supplemented liver thioglycollate broth,
regardless of whether the patients had taken antimicrobial agents prior to
surgery. However, when sonicate fluid was inoculated into anaerobic Bactec
bottles, the median time to positivity was 7.4 days and only 12 cases (43%) were 
correctly identified. Sixteen cases remained negative after 14 days of
incubation.
CONCLUSION: Depending on the pathogen, incubation of sonicate fluid using blood
culture bottles can support diagnosis of PJI but compared with our culture medium
it is less efficient if anaerobes are the suspected cause of infection.
Microbiological expertise is therefore indispensable to ensure reliable detection
of these microorganisms in PJI until a gold standard for laboratory handling of
anaerobes has been established.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102152 
PMID: 32001335 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None of the
authors has a conflict of interest.

