
1. Diabetes. 2020 Aug 14. pii: db200503. doi: 10.2337/db20-0503. [Epub ahead of
print]

Analysis of the Composition and Functions of the Microbiome in Diabetic Foot
Osteomyelitis based on 16S rRNA and Metagenome Sequencing Technology.

Mengchen Z(1), Yulan C(2), Ping H(3), Yin C(1), Xiangrong L(1), Xinzhao F(1), Bao
Z(4), Xianbo W(4), Nan J(5), Qingrong L(5), Hao Z(6), Yaoming X(1), Fang G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical College,
Zunyi, China.
(3)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Xiaogan Central Hospital, Xiaogan, China.
(4)School of Public Health and Tropic Medicine, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics & Traumatology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)Department of Hospital Infection Management of Nanfang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, China gfmhx96@fimmu.com.

Metagenome sequencing has not been used in infected bone specimens. This study
aimed to analyze the microbiome and its functions. This prospective observational
study explored the microbiome and its functions of DFO (group DM) and
posttraumatic foot osteomyelitis (PFO) (group NDM) based on 16S rRNA sequencing
and metagenome sequencing technologies. Spearman analysis was used to explore the
correlation between dominant species and clinical indicators of patients with
DFO. High-throughput sequencing showed that all the specimens were polymicrobial.
The microbial diversity was significantly higher in DM than in NDM. Firmicutes,
Prevotellaceae, and Prevotella were the most abundant microbes in DM. The most
abundant microbes in NDM were Proteobacteria, Halomonadaceae, and Halomonas
Prevotella denticola, Prevotella jejuni and Prevotella fusca had positive
correlation with the duration of diabetic foot infection (DFI_d). Proteus
vulgaris was positively correlated with the infection index, while Bacteroides
fragilis was negatively correlated. The microbial functional genes were more
abundant in DM than in NDM. Metagenome sequencing is feasible for the analysis of
the microbiome in infected bone specimens. G- bacteria and anaerobes are dominant
in DFO.

© 2020 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db20-0503 
PMID: 32801139 

