
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Jul 25:102237. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102237. [Epub ahead of
print]

Human gut-derived commensal suppresses generation of T-cell response to gliadin
in humanized mice by modulating gut microbiota.

Bodkhe R(1), Marietta EV(2), Balakrishnan B(3), Luckey DH(3), Horwath IE(2),
Shouche YS(4), Taneja V(5), Murray JA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA; The YSS Lab,
National Centre for Microbial Resource, National Centre for Cell Science, Pune,
India.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)The YSS Lab, National Centre for Microbial Resource, National Centre for Cell 
Science, Pune, India.
(5)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address:
taneja.veena@mayo.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo
Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address:
murray.joseph@mayo.edu.

The human intestinal tract is colonized by a large number of diverse
microorganisms that play various important physiologic functions. In inflammatory
gut diseases including celiac disease (CeD), a dysbiotic state of microbiome has 
been observed. Interestingly, this perturbed microbiome is normalized towards
eubiosis in patients showing recovery after treatment. The treatment has been
observed to increase the abundance of beneficial microbes in comparison to
non-treated patients. In this study, we investigated the effect of Prevotella
histicola or Prevotella melaninogenica, isolated from the duodenum of a treated
CeD patient, on the induction and maintenance of oral tolerance to gliadin, a CeD
associated subgroup of gluten proteins, in NOD.DQ8.ABo transgenic mice.
Conventionally raised mice on a gluten free diet were orally gavaged with
bacteria before and after injection with pepsin trypsin digested gliadin
(PTD-gliadin). P. histicola suppressed the cellular response to gliadin, whereas 
P. melaninogenica failed to suppress an immune response against gliadin.
Interestingly, tolerance to gliadin in NOD.DQ8.ABo mice may be associated with
gut microbiota as mice gavaged with P melaninogenica harbored a different
microbial diversity as compared to P. histicola treated mice. This study provides
experimental evidence that gut microbes like P. histicola from treated patients
can suppress the immune response against gliadin epitopes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102237 
PMID: 32721554 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare the following conflicts of interest: Dr. Joseph Murray, Dr. Veena Taneja,
and Dr. Eric Marietta are co-inventors on patent #9005603 “PREVOTELLA HISTICOLA
PREPARATIONS AND THE TREATMENT OF AUTOIMMUNE CONDITIONS.”

