
1. Int Endod J. 2020 May;53(5):604-618. doi: 10.1111/iej.13261. Epub 2020 Jan 28.

Efficacy of reciprocating and ultrasonic activation of 6% sodium hypochlorite in 
the reduction of microbial content and virulence factors in teeth with primary
endodontic infection.

Aveiro E(1), Chiarelli-Neto VM(1), de-Jesus-Soares A(1), Zaia AA(1), Ferraz
CCR(1), Almeida JFA(1), Marciano MA(1), Feres M(2), Gomes BPFA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Division of Endodontics, Piracicaba
Dental School, State University of Campinas-UNICAMP, Piracicaba, São Paulo,
Brazil.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Guarulhos University-UnG, Guarulhos, São Paulo, 
Brazil.

AIM: To evaluate in a clinical trial the efficacy of reciprocating and ultrasonic
activation of 6% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) in the microbial composition and
reduction in microbial load as well as in levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and 
lipoteichoic acid (LTA) in teeth with primary endodontic infections.
METHODOLOGY: Samples were collected from 24 root canals with pulp necrosis and
periapical lesions, before and after chemo-mechanical canal preparation. The
teeth were randomly divided according to the activation protocol as follows:
control group without activation (WA, n = 8), reciprocating activation group
using Easy Clean tip (EC, n = 8) and ultrasonic activation group using Irrisonic 
insert (US, n = 8). Microbiological specimens were processed using a culture
technique and microbiota composition was analysed using the checkerboard
technique. The levels of LPS and LTA were quantified using limulus amebocyte
lysate (LAL) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), respectively. The
Fisher's exact test, Kruskal-Wallis, Dunn's and Wilcoxon's test with a
significance level of P < 0.05 were used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: All initial specimens had growth of viable bacteria in fastidious
anaerobe agar (FAA), with an average of 105  CFU mL-1 , whereas only one case had
such growth after chemo-mechanical canal preparation. LPS and LTA were recovered 
in 100% of the cases. Chemo-mechanical canal preparation significantly decreased 
the levels of LPS and LTA (P < 0.05), but no significant differences were found
between the groups (P > 0.05). Through the checkerboard technique, bacteria were 
found in 100% of the initial specimens with concentrations between <105 and 106 .
The most frequently identified microorganisms were Prevotella nigrescens and
Enterococcus hirae. After chemo-mechanical canal preparation, many species were
not detected in any of the three groups tested. A significant reduction occurred 
in Group US, followed by Groups EC and WA.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of 6% NaOCl reduced the levels of LPS and LTA with
no differences between the groups. However, ultrasonic activation was associated 
with a greater reduction in microbial load within root canals.

© 2019 International Endodontic Journal. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iej.13261 
PMID: 31879958  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

