
1. Laryngoscope. 2019 Nov 20. doi: 10.1002/lary.28403. [Epub ahead of print]

Tonsillar surface swab bacterial culture results differ from those of the
tonsillar core in recurrent tonsillitis.

Dickinson A(1)(2), Kankaanpää H(1), Silén S(1)(2), Meri S(3), Haapaniemi A(1),
Ylikoski J(4), Mäkitie A(1)(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Research Program in Systems Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Haartman Institute, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Helsinki Ear Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Division of Ear, Nose and Throat Diseases, Department of Clinical Sciences,
Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: We aimed to determine whether there was a difference
between core and surface bacteriology of Finnish adults with recurrent or chronic
tonsillitis to understand whether a surface swab is worthwhile and which bacteria
are involved.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
METHODS: Uninflamed tonsillar surface swabs and core biopsies were taken prior to
and during surgery, respectively, in 103 patients aged 16 to 66 years undergoing 
tonsillectomy for recurrent or chronic tonsillitis. The McNemar test was used to 
determine differences between the surface and core in the most prevalent
bacterial species.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven bacterial species were isolated in addition to normal flora
and were more commonly found in the core (1.11 surface and 4.75 core bacteria
isolated per patient). Viridans group streptococci were the most commonly
detected bacteria, found in 88% of the patients, mainly in the core. The bacteria
in general were mainly isolated from the core. Of the 10 most prevalent bacteria,
only group C β-hemolytic streptococci showed no difference between detection from
core and surface swabs. Other bacteria found mainly in the core include
Prevotella melaninogenica, Staphylococcus aureus, and fusobacteria.
CONCLUSIONS: There is discord between the surface and core bacteria. A different 
population of bacteria exists in the core, especially anaerobic bacteria,
suggesting that a core sample may be useful in evaluating recurrent and chronic
tonsillitis.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4 Laryngoscope, 2019.

© 2019 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.28403 
PMID: 31747474 

