
1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 24;15(3):e0230667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230667.
eCollection 2020.

Dysbiotic oral microbiota and infected salivary glands in Sjögren's syndrome.

Alam J(1), Lee A(1), Lee J(1), Kwon DI(1), Park HK(2), Park JH(3), Jeon S(1),
Baek K(1), Lee J(4), Park SH(4), Choi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, Seoul National
University School of Dentistry, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Departments of Oral Medicine and Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry and
Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Internal medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Key events in the pathogenesis of Sjӧgren syndrome (SS) include the change of
salivary gland epithelial cells into antigen-presenting cell-like phenotypes and 
focal lymphocytic sialadenitis (FLS). However, what triggers these features in SS
is unknown. Dysbiosis of the gut and oral microbiomes is a potential
environmental factor in SS, but its connection to the etiopathogenesis of SS
remains unclear. This study aimed to characterize the oral microbiota in SS and
to investigate its potential role in the pathogenesis of SS. Oral bacterial
communities were collected by whole mouthwash from control subjects (14 without
oral dryness and 11 with dryness) and primary SS patients (8 without oral dryness
and 17 with dryness) and were analyzed by pyrosequencing. The SS oral microbiota 
was characterized by an increased bacterial load and Shannon diversity. Through
comparisons of control and SS in combined samples and then separately in non-dry 
and dry conditions, SS-associated taxa independent of dryness were identified.
Three SS-associated species and 2 control species were selected and used to
challenge human submandibular gland tumor (HSG) cells. Among the selected
SS-associated bacterial species, Prevotella melaninogenica uniquely upregulated
the expression of MHC molecules, CD80, and IFNλ in HSG cells. Concomitantly, P.
melaninogenica efficiently invaded HSG cells. Sections of labial salivary gland
(LSG) biopsies from 8 non-SS subjects and 15 SS patients were subjected to in
situ hybridization using universal and P. melaninogenica-specific probes. Ductal 
cells and the areas of infiltration were heavily infected with bacteria in the
LSGs with FLS. Collectively, dysbiotic oral microbiota may initiate the
deregulation of SGECs and the IFN signature through bacterial invasion into
ductal cells. These findings may provide new insights into the etiopathogenesis
of SS.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0230667 
PMCID: PMC7092996
PMID: 32208441  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

