
1. PeerJ. 2020 Sep 10;8:e9917. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9917. eCollection 2020.

Evaluation of different culture media to support in vitro growth and biofilm
formation of bacterial vaginosis-associated anaerobes.

Rosca AS(1), Castro J(1), Cerca N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Research in Biofilms Rosário Oliveira-Centre of Biological
Engineering, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.

Background: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is one of the most common vaginal infections
worldwide. It is associated with the presence of a dense polymicrobial biofilm on
the vaginal epithelium, formed mainly by Gardnerella species. The biofilm also
contains other anaerobic species, but little is known about their role in BV
development.
Aim: To evaluate the influence of different culture media on the planktonic and
biofilm growth of six cultivable anaerobes frequently associated with BV, namely 
Gardnerella sp., Atopobium vaginae, Lactobacillus iners, Mobiluncus curtisii,
Peptostreptococcus anaerobius and Prevotella bivia.
Methods: A total of nine different culture media compositions, including
commercially available and chemically defined media simulating genital tract
secretions, were tested in this study. Planktonic cultures and biofilms were
grown under anaerobic conditions (10% carbon dioxide, 10% helium and 80%
nitrogen). Planktonic growth was assessed by optical density measurements, and
biofilm formation was quantified by crystal violet staining.
Results: Significant planktonic growth was observed for Gardnerella sp., A.
vaginae and L. iners in New York City III broth, with or without ascorbic acid
supplementation. Biofilm quantification showed high in vitro biofilm growth for
Gardnerella sp., P. anaerobius and P. bivia in almost all culture media excluding
Brucella broth. Contrary, only New York City III broth was able to promote
biofilm formation for A. vaginae, L. iners and M. curtisii.
Conclusions: Our data demonstrate that New York City III broth relative to the
other tested media is the most conducive for future studies addressing
polymicrobial biofilms development as this culture medium allowed the formation
of significant levels of single-species biofilms.

© 2020 Rosca et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9917 
PMCID: PMC7487148
PMID: 32974104 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

