
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2020 Oct 1:102035. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.102035. [Epub ahead of print]

Effectiveness of single versus multiple episodes of photodynamic therapy as
adjunct to scaling and root planing on periodontopathogenic bacteria in patients 
with periodontitis.

Muzaheed M(1), Acharya S(2), Hakami AR(3), Allemailem KS(4), Alqahtani K(5), Al
Saffan A(6), Aldakheel FM(7), Divakar DD(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Science, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
Electronic address: marasheed@iau.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Public Health, College of Public Health, Imam Abdulrahman Bin
Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Khalid University, Abha 61481, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratories, College of Applied Medical Sciences,
Qassim University, Buraydah, Saudi Arabia.
(5)King Abdulaziz Medical City, NGHA, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Preventive Department, College of Dentistry, Riyadh Elm University, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.
(7)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical
Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Dental Biomaterials Research Chair, Dental Health Department, College of
Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud University, P. O. Box: 10219, Riyadh 11433,
Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present 6-months' follow-up study was to assess the
influence of single versus multiple episodes of photodynamic therapy (PDT) as
adjunct to scaling and root planning (SRP) on periodontopathogenic bacteria in
patients with periodontitis.
METHODS: Forty-five patients with periodontitis were included. The patients were 
randomly divided into 3 groups. In groups 1 (n = 15), 2 (n = 15) and 3 (n = 15), 
the patients under went SRP with PDT at (a) baseline; (b) baseline and after
1-month; and (c) baseline and after 1- and 3-months. Peri-implant plaque index
(PI), bleeding on probing (BOP), probing depth (PD), clinical attachment loss
(CAL) and marginal bone loss (MBL) were measured at baseline and 6-months
follow-up. Counts of Porphyromonas gingivalis, Treponema denticola, Prevotella
intermedia, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Aggregatibacter Actinomycetemcomitans
were determined before SRP and at 4- and 6-months follow-up.
RESULTS: All patients had grade-B periodontitis. There was no statistically
significant difference in age and gender in all groups. At- 6-months' follow-up, 
patients that underwent SRP once showed significantly higher counts of
periodontopathogenic bacteria in the oral biofilm compared with patients that
received photobiomodulation twice or three times (P < 0.05). There was no
significant difference in the periodontal parameters and counts of gram-negative 
bacteria in patients that received photobiomodulation 2 or 3 times.
CONCLUSION: At least 2 sessions of photobiomodulation followed by baseline SRP is
essential to achieve a significant reduction in the counts of subgingival
bacteria in periodontitis patients over a 6-month follow-up period.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.102035 
PMID: 33011399 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None declared.

