
1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2020 Aug 11;7:417. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.00417.
eCollection 2020.

H. pylori Eradication Treatment Causes Alterations in the Gut Microbiota and
Blood Lipid Levels.

Martín-Núñez GM(1)(2), Cornejo-Pareja I(1)(2), Roca-Rodríguez MDM(3),
Clemente-Postigo M(2)(4), Cardona F(1)(2), Fernández-García JC(1)(2),
Moreno-Indias I(1)(2), Tinahones FJ(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la
Victoria, Málaga, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la
Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Universitario Puerta del 
Mar, Cádiz, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Biología Celular, Fisiología e Inmunología, Instituto
Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba (IMIBIC), Universidad de
Córdoba, Hospital Universitario Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain.

Background: The gut microbiome plays an important role in the lipid metabolism.
Antibiotic treatment causes changes in the intestinal microbiota. Our objective
was to explore the relationship between changes in the intestinal microbiota and 
the level of plasma high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) and low density
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL). Methods: Prospective case-control study with
Helicobacter pylori-positive patients undergoing eradication therapy with
omeprazole, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin. Stool and blood samples were
obtained from 20 controls (H. pylori negative) and 40 patients before and 2
months after antibiotic treatment. Gut microbiota was determined through 16S rRNA
amplicon sequencing (Illumina MiSeq). Results: Eradication treatment for H.
pylori increased the HDL levels, and caused changes in gut microbiota profiles.
An unfavorable lipid profiles (high LDL and low HDL levels) was associated with a
low microbial richness and an increase of the Bacteroidetes phylum. Prevotella
copri, Lachonobacterium, and Delsufovibrio were positively associated with HDL
while Rikenellaceae was negatively associated with HDL after completing
antibiotic treatment. Conclusions: Helicobacter pylori eradication treatment
could improve lipid metabolism in relation with an increase in the HDL. Changes
in the abundance of specific bacteria, such as P. copri, Lachonobacterium,
Delsufovibrio, and Rikenellaceae could be associated with change in the plasma
HDL levels.

Copyright © 2020 Martín-Núñez, Cornejo-Pareja, Roca-Rodríguez, Clemente-Postigo, 
Cardona, Fernández-García, Moreno-Indias and Tinahones.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2020.00417 
PMCID: PMC7431686
PMID: 32850910 

