
1. Oral Dis. 2020 Aug 13. doi: 10.1111/odi.13603. [Epub ahead of print]

Microbiome variations in preschool children with halitosis.

Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Zhu C(1)(2)(3), Feng X(1)(2)(3), Chen X(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College 
of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.
(2)National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai, China.
(3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology &, Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the bacterial characteristics associated with intra-oral
halitosis among Chinese preschool children.
METHODS: An epidemiological study was conducted among 273 preschool children
(aged 3-4 years) in Shanghai, China, followed by the collection of 16 samples
from the tongue coating of caries-free healthy and halitosis participants. The
characterization of associated microbial communities was performed using 16S rRNA
gene sequencing on the MiSeq.
RESULTS: Halitosis was observed in 13.2% of the preschool children. No
significant difference in terms of microbial diversity (p > .05) was detected in 
the control and halitosis groups. The dominant bacterial genera observed in both 
groups included Prevotella, Veillonella, Streptococcus, Neisseria, Actinomyces,
Haemophilus, and Leptotrichia. The relative proportions of thirteen species
(including Leptotrichia sp. HMT_417, Prevotella Pallens, and Alloprevotella rava)
were significantly higher in the halitosis group compared with the control group,
whereas the distribution of seventeen species from genera Streptococcus, Gemella,
and Kingella showed a higher abundance in the control group. Further
investigation of interactions among species demonstrated obvious differences in
two groups, indicating that various microorganisms interact to produce halitosis 
in preschool children.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, halitosis is associated with multi-microbial mutual
interactions. The oral flora microorganisms may exert potentiating or inhibiting 
effects on each other.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.13603 
PMID: 32790926 

