
1. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2020 Aug 11. pii: S2212-2672(20)30438-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jand.2020.04.018. [Epub ahead of print]

Associations between Diet, the Gut Microbiome, and Short-Chain Fatty Acid
Production among Older Caribbean Latino Adults.

Maldonado-Contreras A, Noel SE, Ward DV, Velez M, Mangano KM.

BACKGROUND: Caribbean Latino adults have disproportionately high prevalence of
chronic disease; however, underlying mechanisms are unknown. Unique gut
microbiome profiles and relation to dietary quality may underlie health
disparities.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the dietary quality of an underrepresented group of
Caribbean Latino older adults with high prevalence of chronic disease;
characterize gut microbiome profiles in this cohort; determine associations
between dietary quality, gut microbiome composition, and short-chain fatty acid
(SCFA) production; examine associations of clinical factors (body mass index,
type 2 diabetes [T2D] status, and laxative use) with gut microbiome composition.
DESIGN: The study design was cross-sectional.
PARTICIPANTS/SETTING: Recruitment and interviews occurred at the Senior Center in
Lawrence, MA, from September 2016-September 2017. A total of 20 adults aged ≥50
years, self-identified of Caribbean Latino origin, without use of antibiotics in 
6 months or intestinal surgery were included in the study.
EXPOSURE AND OUTCOME MEASURES: Diet was assessed by two, 24-hour recalls and
dietary quality was calculated using the Healthy Eating Index 2015 and the
Mediterranean Diet Score. The gut microbiome was assessed by 16S rRNA sequencing 
and fecal SCFA content. Anthropometrics (ie, weight and height) were measured by 
a trained interviewer, and self-reported laxative use, and other self-report
health outcomes (ie, T2D status) were assessed by questionnaire.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES: Faith Phylogenetic Diversity (alpha diversity) and unique
fraction metric, or UniFrac (beta diversity) and nonphylogenetic metrics,
including Shannon diversity index (alpha diversity) were calculated. Spearman
correlations and group comparisons using Kruskal-Wallis test between alpha
diversity indexes and nutrient intakes were calculated. Patterns in the
microbiome were estimated using a partitioning around medoids with estimation of 
number of clusters, with optimum average silhouette width. Log odds were
calculated to compare predefined nutrients and diet score components between
microbiome clusters using multivariable logistic regression, controlling for age 
and sex. Pearson correlation was used to relate SCFA fecal content to individual 
nutrients and diet indexes. Final models were additionally adjusted for laxative 
use. Differences in lifestyle factors by gut microbiome cluster were tested by
Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: Generally, there was poor alignment of participant's diets to either the
Mediterranean Diet score or Healthy Eating Index 2015. Range in the Healthy
Eating Index 2015 was 36 to 90, where only 5% (n=1) of the sample showed high
adherence to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans. Mediterranean Diet scores
suggested low conformance with a Mediterranean eating pattern (score range=2 to
8, where 45% scored ≤3 [poor adherence]). The gut microbiome separated into two
clusters by difference in a single bacterial taxon: Prevotella copri (P copri)
(permutational multivariate analysis of variance [PERMANOVA] R2=0.576, ADONIS
function P=0.001). Significantly lower P copri abundance was observed in cluster 
1 compared with cluster 2 (Mann-Whitney P<0.0001). Samples in the P copri
dominated cluster 2 showed significantly lower alpha diversity compared with P
copri depleted cluster 1 (Shannon diversity index P=0.01). Individuals in the P
copri dominated cluster showed a trend toward higher 18:3 α-linolenic fatty acid 
intakes (P=0.09). Percentage of energy from total fat intake was significantly,
positively correlated with fecal acetate (r=0.46; P=0.04), butyrate (r=0.50;
P=0.03) and propionate (r=0.52; P=0.02). Associations between dietary intake and 
composition of the gut microbiome were attenuated by self-report recent laxative 
use. Individuals with T2D exhibited a significantly greater abundance of the
Enterobacteriales (P=0.01) and a trend toward lower fecal content of butyric acid
compared to subjects without T2D (P=0.08). Significant beta diversity differences
were observed by weight (Mantel P<0.003) and body mass index (Mantel P<0.07).
CONCLUSIONS: Two unique microbiome profiles, identified by abundance of P copri, 
were identified among Caribbean Latino adults. Microbiome profiles and SCFA
content were associated with diet, T2D, and lifestyle. Further research is needed
to determine the role of P copri and SCFA production in the risk for chronic
disease and associated lifestyle predictors.

Copyright © 2020 Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jand.2020.04.018 
PMID: 32798072 

