
1. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2019 Nov;126:109624. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.109624. Epub 2019 Aug 7.

The bacteriome of otitis media with effusion: Does it originate from the adenoid?

Ari O(1), Karabudak S(1), Kalcioglu MT(2), Gunduz AY(3), Durmaz R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Central Research and Application Center,
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Goztepe Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Istanbul, Turkey.
Electronic address: mahmut.kalcioglu@medeniyet.edu.tr.
(3)Istanbul Medeniyet University, Faculty of Medicine, Goztepe Training and
Research Hospital, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Central Research and Application Center,
Ankara, Turkey; Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University, Faculty of Medicine
Department of Clinical Microbiology, Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the composition and the
diversity of bacteriome in middle ear effusion (MEE) and adenoid specimens of
pediatric patients having otitis media with effusion (OME).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sample collection from children with OME followed by next 
generation sequencing. Seventeen adenoid and 43 middle ear effusion specimens
from 25 children having OME were evaluated. Microbiome analysis was performed via
Ion 16S rRNA metagenomics kit.
RESULTS: Twenty-two different bacterial species were identified from all of the
samples analyzed. There were variations in the prevalence and relative abundance 
of the bacteriome observed between adenoid and MEE samples. MEE microbiome was
significantly dominated by Alloicoccus otitis (44%), Turicella otitidis (6%), and
Staphylococcus auricularis (3%). Whereas, Rothia mucilaginosa (39%), R.
dentocariosa (11%), S. aureus (5%), Veillonella rogosae (2%), Granulicatella
elegans (2%), Granulicatella adiacens (2%), Eikenella corrodens (1%), and
Prevotella nanceiensis (1%) had significantly higher relative abundance in
adenoid samples. Overall, there was no statistically significant difference in
alpha diversity of MEE and adenoid samples, whereas adenoid samples constituted a
cluster in the beta diversity graph.
CONCLUSION: Bacteriome of MEE is mostly dominated by A. otitis yet accompanied by
other bacteria with lower relative abundances suggests that OME is likely to be a
polymicrobial process. Despite similarities, significant differences in relative 
abundances of several predominant species between bacteriome in the MEE and
adenoid put the theory that OME in children is originated from the adenoids under
question.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijporl.2019.109624 
PMID: 31408742  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

