
1. Allergy. 2020 Jun 7. doi: 10.1111/all.14438. [Epub ahead of print]

Integration of metagenomics-metabolomics reveals specific signatures and
functions of airway microbiota in mite-sensitized childhood asthma.

Chiu CY(1)(2), Chou HC(3), Chang LC(4), Fan WL(5), Dinh MCV(6), Kuo YL(7), Chung 
WH(8), Lai HC(9)(10), Hsieh WP(3), Su SC(8)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Clinical Metabolomics Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Statistics, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Mathematical Sciences, Florida Atlantic University, Florida,
USA.
(5)Genomic Medicine Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Linkou,
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Computer Science, Florida Atlantic University, Florida, USA.
(7)Biotools, Co. Ltd, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(8)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medical Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Microbiota
Research Center, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(10)Central Research Laboratory, XiaMen Chang Gung Hospital, XiaMen, China.

BACKGROUND: Childhood asthma is a multifactorial inflammatory condition of the
airways, associated with specific changes in respiratory microbiome and
circulating metabolome.
METHODS: To explore the functional capacity of asthmatic microbiome and its
intricate connection with the host, we performed shotgun sequencing of airway
microbiome and untargeted metabolomics profiling of serum samples in a cohort of 
children with mite-sensitized asthma and non-asthmatic controls.
RESULTS: We observed higher gene counts and sample-to-sample dissimilarities in
asthmatic microbiomes, indicating a more heterogeneous community structure and
functionality among the cases than in controls. Moreover, we identified airway
microbial species linked to changes in circulating metabolites and IgE responses 
of the host, including a positive correlation between Prevotella sp oral taxon
306 and dimethylglycine that were both decreased in patients. Several
control-enriched species (Eubacterium sulci, Prevotella pallens, and Prevotella
sp oral taxon 306) were inversely correlated with total and allergen-specific IgE
levels. Genes related to microbial carbohydrate, amino acid, and lipid metabolism
were differentially enriched, suggesting that changes in microbial metabolism may
contribute to respiratory health in asthmatics. Pathway modules relevant to
allergic responses were differentially abundant in asthmatic microbiome, such as 
enrichments for biofilm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, membrane
trafficking, histidine metabolism, and glycosaminoglycan degradation, and
depletions for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon degradation. Further, we
identified metagenomic and metabolomic markers (eg, Eubacterium sulci) to
discriminate cases from the non-asthmatic controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our dual-omics data reveal the connections between respiratory
microbes and circulating metabolites perturbed in mite-sensitized pediatric
asthma, which may be of etiological and diagnostic implications.

© 2020 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.14438 
PMID: 32506557 

