
1. Helicobacter. 2020 Sep 8:e12753. doi: 10.1111/hel.12753. [Epub ahead of print]

Duodenal microbiome in patients with or without Helicobacter pylori infection.

Suárez-Jaramillo A(1), Baldeón ME(2), Prado B(1), Fornasini M(2), Cohen H(3),
Flores N(2), Salvador I(2), Cargua O(2), Realpe J(2), Cárdenas PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología, COCIBA, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito,
Ecuador.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud Eugenio Espejo, Centro de Investigación
Biomédica, Universidad Tecnológica Equinoccial, Quito, Ecuador.
(3)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la República Uruguay, Montevideo,
Uruguay.

BACKGROUND: Intestinal microbiota are recognized as an organ with important
physiological functions whose alterations have been associated with common
diseases including inflammatory intestinal conditions, malnutrition, type-2
diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases. The composition and function of the
microbiota in the distal part of the intestine has been mainly described, while
there is limited information on the small intestine microbiota. The objective of 
the present study was to describe the duodenal microbiome in individuals with
dyspepsia in the presence or absence of Helicobacter pylori gastric infection.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-eight biopsies from the proximal duodenum of
uninfected and 37 from H pylori-infected individuals were analyzed. Microbiota
composition was assessed by PCR amplification and sequencing of 16S rRNA and ITS 
genes; sequences were analyzed with QIIME2.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: At the phyla level, Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes,
Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria were predominant in the mucosal
associated duodenal microbiota (MAM); at the genera level, we observed the
predominance of Ralstonia, Streptococcus, Pseudomonas, Haemophilus,
Herbaspirillum, Neisseria, and Veillonella. Microbiota α-diversity was higher in 
H pylori-infected individuals than in non-infected ones. In terms of β-diversity 
metrics, there was a statistically significant difference between groups. Also,
relative abundance of Haemophilus, Neisseria, Prevotella pallens, Prevotella 7,
and Streptococcus was greater in H pylori-infected patients. In infected
patients, several types of H pylori were present in duodenal MAM. Finally, the
majority of duodenal samples had fungi sequences; the most common taxa observed
were Recurvomyces followed by Ascomycota and Basidiomycota.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/hel.12753 
PMID: 32896972 

