
1. J Periodontal Res. 2020 Sep 3. doi: 10.1111/jre.12797. [Epub ahead of print]

Microbial and host-derived biomarker changes during ligature-induced and
spontaneous peri-implantitis in the Beagle dog.

Monje A(1)(2), Eick S(3), Buser D(4), Salvi GE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Universidad Internacional de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Periodontology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Department of Periodontology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Stomatology and Oral Surgery, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate microbial and host-derived biomarker changes during
experimental peri-implantitis in the Beagle dog.
BACKGROUND: Limited data exist on the microbial and biomarker changes during
progressive bone loss as result of experimental peri-implantitis.
METHODS: In total, 36 implants (ndogs  = 6) were assessed over 3 episodes of
ligature-induced peri-implantitis followed by a period of spontaneous
progression. Implants with hybrid (H) and completely rough (R) surface designs
were used. Clinical and radiographic parameters were recorded at 4 timepoints.
Peri-implant sulcus fluid was collected from the buccal and lingual aspects of
the implants. The presence of 7 bacterial species and 2 host-derived biomarkers
was assessed during the study period.
RESULTS: Total bacterial counts were significantly correlated with marginal bone 
loss (MBL) (r = .21; P = .009). Further, Phorphyromonas gulae (Pg) and Tannerella
forsythia (Tf) were commonly correlated with MBL, suppuration (SUP) and the
sulcular bleeding index scores (mSBI) (P < .05). Other bacteria were further
correlated with SUP, mSBI, and MBL. While the analyzed bacteria dropped,
Prevotella intermedia (Pi) further increased during the spontaneous progressive
phase (P < .05). Total bacterial load did not differ significantly between H and 
R implants. Host-derived IL-10 was undetected along the study period. IL-1β
positively correlated with probing pocket depth (r = .18; P = .03). During
spontaneous progression, H implants displayed statistically significant lower
levels of IL-1β (P = .003).
CONCLUSION: Experimental peri-implantitis is associated with an increase in
bacterial counts. While Pg and Tf are associated with ligature-induced disease
progression, Pi augmented its load during the spontaneous progressive phase.
IL-1β is associated with pocket probing depth and influenced by implant surface
characteristics during the spontaneous progression phase.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12797 
PMID: 32885473 

