
1. J Dairy Sci. 2019 Dec;102(12):11786-11797. doi: 10.3168/jds.2019-17106. Epub 2019
Oct 3.

Symposium review: The uterine microbiome associated with the development of
uterine disease in dairy cows.

Galvão KN(1), Bicalho RC(2), Jeon SJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Large Animal Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Florida, Gainesville 32610; D. H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal
Biology Research Program, University of Florida, Gainesville 32610. Electronic
address: galvaok@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853.
(3)Department of Biomedical Veterinary Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Long Island University, Brookville, NY 11548.

Until 2010, our knowledge of the uterine microbiome in cows that developed
uterine disease relied almost exclusively on culture-dependent studies and mostly
included cows with clinical endometritis (i.e., with purulent uterine discharge).
Those studies consistently found a strong positive correlation between
Trueperella pyogenes and clinical endometritis, whereas other pathogens such as
Escherichia coli, Fusobacterium necrophorum, Prevotella melaninogenica, and
Bacteroides spp. were also commonly cocultured. In contrast, Streptococcus spp., 
Staphylococcus spp., and Bacillus spp. were usually isolated from healthy cows.
Starting in 2010, culture-independent studies using PCR explored the microbiome
of cows with metritis and clinical endometritis, and observed that E. coli was a 
pioneer pathogen that predisposed cows to infection with F. necrophorum, which
was strongly associated with metritis, and to infection with T. pyogenes, which
was strongly associated with clinical endometritis. Starting in 2011,
culture-independent studies using metagenomic sequencing expanded our knowledge
of the uterine microbiome. It has been shown that cows have bacteria in the
uterus even before calving, they have an established uterine microbiome within 20
min of calving, and that the microbiome structure is identical between cows that 
develop metritis and healthy cows until 2 d postpartum, after which the bacterial
structure of cows that developed metritis deviates in favor of greater relative
abundance of Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria and lesser relative abundance of
Proteobacteria and Tenericutes. The shift in the uterine microbiome in cows that 
develop metritis is characterized by a loss of heterogeneity and a decrease in
bacterial richness. At the genus level, Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and
Fusobacterium have the strongest association with metritis. At the species level,
we observed that Bacteroides pyogenes, Porphyromonas levii, and Helcococcus ovis 
were potential emerging uterine pathogens. Finally, we have shown that the
hematogenous route is a viable route of uterine infection with uterine pathogens.
Herein, we propose that metritis is associated with a dysbiosis of the uterine
microbiota characterized by decreased richness, and an increase in Bacteroidetes 
and Fusobacteria, particularly Bacteroides, Porphyromonas, and Fusobacterium.

Copyright © 2019 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2019-17106 
PMID: 31587913  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

