
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2020 Apr;54(2):246-256. doi: 10.5578/mb.69309.

[Antimicrobial Susceptibility Profiles of Prevotella Species Determined by
Gradient Test Method in Two Centers in Istanbul].

[Article in Turkish]

Ülger Toprak N(1), Akgül Ö(1), Külekçi G(2), Söyletir G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marmara University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Istanbul University Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Microbiology,
Istanbul, Turkey.

Prevotella species, being members of the human microbiota, are obligate anaerobic
gram-negative bacteria. These organisms may cause opportunistic infections,
including specific oral infections, local or systemic infections. A significant
increase of resistance to some antimicrobials has been detected among Prevotella 
species. The frequency of resistance vary among isolates from different infection
sources and between geographic locations. The knowledge about the antimicrobial
susceptibility patterns of different Prevotella species is limited in Turkey.
Providing the antimicrobial susceptibility data of these bacteria is very
important for effective empirical treatment. In this study, we aimed to determine
susceptibility data for 12 antimicrobial agents against Prevotella strains
originating from human infections, collected in two centers in Turkey. A total of
118 Prevotella strains, isolated from different clinical samples in Marmara
University Faculty of Medicine Medical Microbiology and Istanbul University
Faculty of Dentistry Oral Microbiology Laboratories between January 2014-December
2017, were tested. Organisms were identified by using MALDI-TOF MS and by 16S
rRNA gene sequencing. Minimal inhibitor concentrations of ampicillin,
ampicillin-sulbactam, piperacillin-tazobactam, cefoxitin, meropenem, imipenem,
clindamycin, tetracycline, tigecycline, moxifloxacin and metronidazole were
determined using gradiyent test methodology (E-test; bioMerieux, France) and the 
European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing, Clinical and
Laboratory Standards Institute and Food and Drug Administration guidelines were
used for interpretation. Thirteen different Prevotella species were identified,
Prevotella bivia and Prevotella nigrescens were the most prevalent species (n=
21) followed by Prevotella buccae (n= 19). All Prevotella strains were
susceptible to piperacillin-tazobactam, cefoxitin, meropenem, imipenem and
tigecycline. A total of 2 (1.7%) isolates were resistant to metronidazole and 1
(0.8%) isolate was intermediately resistant to ampicillin/sulbactam. The
frequency of resistant isolates against ampicillin, clindamycin, tetracycline and
moxifloxacin were 57.6%, 36.4%, 18% and 16.3%, respectively. In conclusion,
piperacillin/tazobactam, cefoxitin, and tigecycline displayed high in vitro
activity against Prevotella spp. and they all remained good candidates for
empiric therapy. Imipenem and meropenem were also found to be very active, but
the usage of carbapenems should be reserved for serious mixed infections,
potentially accompanied by other resistant organisms. Intermediate resistance to 
ampicillinsulbactam and the resistance against metronidazole emphasized the need 
of periodic monitoring of their susceptibility patterns. The high rates of
non-susceptibility to ampicillin, clindamycin, tetracycline and moxifloxacin
indicated that these antimicrobials should not be used for treatment of
infections without prior antimicrobial susceptibility testing.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.69309 
PMID: 32723280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

