
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Sep 25;10(1):15807. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-72807-9.

Unculturable and culturable periodontal-related bacteria are associated with
periodontal inflammation during pregnancy and with preterm low birth weight
delivery.

Ye C(1), Xia Z(1), Tang J(1), Khemwong T(2), Kapila Y(3), Kuraji R(4), Huang
P(1), Wu Y(1), Kobayashi H(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical Research Center for 
Oral Diseases & Dept. of Periodontology West China Hospital of Stomatology,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
113-8549, Japan.
(3)Division of Periodontology, Department of Orofacial Sciences, School of
Dentistry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Life Science Dentistry and Department of Periodontology, The
Nippon Dental University School of Life Dentistry at Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Periodontology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University (TMDU), 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
113-8549, Japan. h-kobayashi.peri@tmd.ac.jp.
(6)Sumitomo Corporation Dental Clinic, Tokyo, Japan. h-kobayashi.peri@tmd.ac.jp.

Recent studies revealed culturable periodontal keystone pathogens are associated 
with preterm low birth weight (PLBW). However, the oral microbiome is also
comprised of hundreds of 'culture-difficult' or 'not-yet-culturable' bacterial
species. To explore the potential role of unculturable and culturable
periodontitis-related bacteria in preterm low birth weight (PLBW) delivery, we
recruited 90 pregnant women in this prospective study. Periodontal parameters,
including pocket probing depth, bleeding on probing, and clinical attachment
level were recorded during the second trimester and following interviews on oral 
hygiene and lifestyle habits. Saliva and serum samples were also collected. After
delivery, birth results were recorded. Real-time PCR analyses were performed to
quantify the levels of periodontitis-related unculturable bacteria (Eubacterium
saphenum, Fretibacterium sp. human oral taxon(HOT) 360, TM7 sp. HOT 356, and
Rothia dentocariosa), and cultivable bacteria (Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, Treponema 
denticola, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Prevotella intermedia) in saliva samples. 
In addition, ELISA analyses were used to determine the IgG titres against
periodontal pathogens in serum samples. Subjects were categorized into a Healthy 
group (H, n = 20) and periodontitis/gingivitis group (PG, n = 70) according to
their periodontal status. The brushing duration was significantly lower in the PG
group compared to the H group. Twenty-two of 90 subjects delivered PLBW infants. 
There was no significant difference in periodontal parameters and serum IgG
levels for periodontal pathogens between PLBW and healthy delivery (HD) groups.
However, ordinal logistic regression analysis revealed that a higher abundance of
Treponema denticola, Prevotella intermedia, Fretibacterium sp. HOT360 and lower
levels of Rothia dentocariosa were significantly associated with the presence of 
periodontal disease during pregnancy. Moreover, the amount of Eubacterium
saphenum in saliva and serum IgG against Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
were negatively correlated with PLBW. Taken together, unculturable
periodontitis-associated bacteria may play an important role both in the presence
of periodontal inflammation during pregnancy and subsequent PLBW.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-72807-9 
PMCID: PMC7519089
PMID: 32978483 

