
1. Gen Dent. 2020 Sep-Oct;68(5):24-28.

Antimicrobial activity of silver diamine fluoride on human periodontitis
microbiota.

Rams TE, Sautter JD, Ramírez-Martínez GJ, Whitaker EJ.

Silver diamine fluoride (SDF) has been used in management of dentinal
hypersensitivity and dental caries. This in vitro study evaluated the
antimicrobial effects of SDF on subgingival microorganisms from severe human
periodontitis lesions. Subgingival biofilm specimens from 24 adults with severe
periodontitis were mixed in vitro with 19% or 38% SDF or left untreated (n = 24
per group) and then inoculated on enriched Brucella blood agar with anaerobic
incubation. Selected red- and orange-complex periodontal pathogens were
phenotypically identified in the subgingival specimens, including Porphyromonas
gingivalis, Tannerella forsythia, Prevotella intermedia/nigrescens, Parvimonas
micra, Campylobacter rectus, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Streptococcus
constellatus. Other microbial species recovered from SDF-treated specimens were
identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption- ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry. The SDF-treated specimens yielded significantly lower mean total
viable counts and significantly lower mean total cultivable proportional levels
of red- and orange-complex periodontal pathogens (0.5%-0.6%) than did untreated
specimens (25.9%) (P < 0.001). The only red- and orange-complex species recovered
from SDF-treated specimens were P micra (3 patients) and S constellatus (1
patient). The predominant cultivable isolates from SDF-treated specimens were
Streptococcus oralis and other streptococci of relatively low periodontopathic
and cariogenic potential. No statistically significant in vitro antimicrobial
differences were found between 19% and 38% SDF against subgingival biofilm
specimens. In this experiment, SDF exhibited substantial in vitro antimicrobial
activity against putative periodontal pathogens from severe periodontitis
lesions. The suppression of red- and orange-complex periodontal pathogens in
subgingival biofilms by SDF treatment, along with the selection of SDF-resistant 
Streptococcus species that are associated with periodontal health, suggests a
potential new therapeutic use for SDF in the management of human periodontal
infections.


PMID: 32857044 

