
1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2020 Jan;79(1):103-111. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215743. Epub
2019 Nov 7.

Metagenome-wide association study of gut microbiome revealed novel aetiology of
rheumatoid arthritis in the Japanese population.

Kishikawa T(1)(2), Maeda Y(3)(4), Nii T(3)(4), Motooka D(5), Matsumoto Y(5),
Matsushita M(6)(7), Matsuoka H(7), Yoshimura M(7), Kawada S(8), Teshigawara S(7),
Oguro E(3)(7), Okita Y(7), Kawamoto K(8), Higa S(8), Hirano T(3), Narazaki M(3), 
Ogata A(8), Saeki Y(7)(9), Nakamura S(5), Inohara H(2), Kumanogoh A(3)(10),
Takeda K(4)(11), Okada Y(12)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University School of Medicine
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.
(3)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan.
(5)Department of Infection Metagenomics, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(6)Department of Rheumatology and Allergology, Saiseikai Senri Hospital, Suita,
Japan.
(7)Rheumatology and Allergology, NHO Osaka Minami Medical Center, Kawachinagano, 
Japan.
(8)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Daini Osaka Police 
Hospital, Tennoji-ku, Japan.
(9)Clinical Research, NHO Osaka Minami Medical Center, Kawachinagano, Japan.
(10)Department of Immunopathology, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.
(11)WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(12)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University School of Medicine
Graduate School of Medicine, Suita, Japan yokada@sg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.
(13)Laboratory of Statistical Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center
(WPI-IFReC), Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
(14)Integrated Frontier Research for Medical Science Division, Institute for Open
and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The causality and pathogenic mechanism of microbiome composition
remain elusive in many diseases, including autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis (RA). This study aimed to elucidate gut microbiome's role in RA
pathology by a comprehensive metagenome-wide association study (MWAS).
METHODS: We conducted MWAS of the RA gut microbiome in the Japanese population (n
case=82, n control=42) by using whole-genome shotgun sequencing of high depth
(average 13 Gb per sample). Our MWAS consisted of three major bioinformatic
analytic pipelines (phylogenetic analysis, functional gene analysis and pathway
analysis).
RESULTS: Phylogenetic case-control association tests showed high abundance of
multiple species belonging to the genus Prevotella (e.g., Prevotella denticola)
in the RA case metagenome. The non-linear machine learning method efficiently
deconvoluted the case-control phylogenetic discrepancy. Gene functional
assessments showed that the abundance of one redox reaction-related gene (R6FCZ7)
was significantly decreased in the RA metagenome compared with controls. A
variety of biological pathways including those related to metabolism (e.g., fatty
acid biosynthesis and glycosaminoglycan degradation) were enriched in the
case-control comparison. A population-specific link between the metagenome and
host genome was identified by comparing biological pathway enrichment between the
RA metagenome and the RA genome-wide association study results. No apparent
discrepancy in alpha or beta diversities of metagenome was found between RA cases
and controls.
CONCLUSION: Our shotgun sequencing-based MWAS highlights a novel link among the
gut microbiome, host genome and pathology of RA, which contributes to our
understanding of the microbiome's role in RA aetiology.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2019-215743 
PMCID: PMC6937407
PMID: 31699813  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

