
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Jun 4;16(6):e1008559. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008559.
eCollection 2020 Jun.

Exploring potential of vaginal Lactobacillus isolates from South African women
for enhancing treatment for bacterial vaginosis.

Happel AU(1), Kullin B(1), Gamieldien H(1), Wentzel N(1), Zauchenberger CZ(1),
Jaspan HB(1)(2), Dabee S(1)(2), Barnabas SL(1)(3), Jaumdally SZ(1), Dietrich
J(4)(5), Gray G(4)(5), Bekker LG(1)(6), Froissart R(7), Passmore JS(1)(8)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(2)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, United States of America.
(3)Family Centre for Research with Ubuntu (FAMCRU), Stellenbosch University,
Tygerberg, South Africa.
(4)Perinatal HIV Research Unit (PHRU), Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)Health Systems Research Unit, South African Medical Research Council, Cape
Town, South Africa.
(6)Desmond Tutu HIV Foundation, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(7)UMR MIVEGEC CNRS-IRD-UM, University Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(8)NRF-DST CAPRISA Centre of Excellence in HIV Prevention, Cape Town, South
Africa.
(9)National Health Laboratory Service (NHLS), Cape Town, South Africa.

Antibiotics continue to be the standard-of-care for bacterial vaginosis (BV),
although recurrence rates are high. Vaginal probiotics may improve durability of 
BV treatment, although few probiotics for vaginal health contain Lactobacillus
spp. that commonly colonize the lower female genital tract. Characteristics of
vaginal Lactobacillus strains from South African women were evaluated for their
probiotic potential in vitro compared to strains from commercial vaginal
products, including growth at varying pHs, ability to lower pH, produce
D-/L-lactate and H2O2, influence growth of BV-associated Gardnerella vaginalis
and Prevotella bivia, adherence to cervical cells and susceptibility to
antibiotics. Fifty-seven Lactobacillus strains were purified from cervico-vaginal
fluid, including L. crispatus, L. jensenii, L. gasseri, L. mucosae, and L.
vaginalis. L crispatus strains grew better at pHs below 4.5 and lowered pH more
effectively than other strains. Production of D-/L-lactate and H2O2 varied
between Lactobacillus species and strains. Lactobacillus strains generally
inhibited P. bivia more uniformly than G. vaginalis isolates. All vaginal
Lactobacillus isolates were resistant to metronidazole while susceptibility to
clindamycin varied. Furthermore, vaginal Lactobacillus strains tended to be
broadly susceptible to penicillin, amoxicillin, rifampicin and rifabutin.
Whole-genome-sequencing of five of the best-performing vaginal Lactobacillus
strains confirmed their likely safety, due to antimicrobial resistance elements
being largely absent, while putative intact prophages were present in the genomes
of two of the five strains. Overall, vaginal Lactobacillus strains largely
performed better in these in vitro assays than probiotic strains currently used
in probiotics for vaginal health. Including the best-performing vaginal
Lactobacillus isolates in a region-specific probiotic for vaginal health may
result in improved BV treatment options.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008559 
PMCID: PMC7271994
PMID: 32497109  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

