
1. Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2020 Jan;157(1):49-58. doi:
10.1016/j.ajodo.2019.01.026.

Microbial profile in different orthodontic appliances by checkerboard DNA-DNA
hybridization: An in-vivo study.

Gujar AN(1), Al-Hazmi A(2), Raj AT(3), Patil S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, KLES Institute of Dental Sciences, Bangalore,
India.
(2)Department of Preventive Dental Science, Division of Orthodontics, College of 
Dentistry, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Oral Pathology and Microbiology, Sri Venkateswara, Dental
College and Hospital, Chennai, India.
(4)Department of Maxillofacial Surgery and Diagnostic Sciences, Division of Oral 
Pathology, College of Dentistry, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia.
Electronic address: dr.ravipatil@gmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: The design of the orthodontic bracket or appliance is 1 of the most
important factors for creating retentive areas for biofilm formation. In
orthodontics, this would be the first study to compare the microbial level
changes in 3 different types of orthodontic appliances using checkerboard DNA-DNA
hybridization technique. The purpose of this study was to evaluate and compare
the extent of appearance of orange and red microbial complexes in patients
undergoing orthodontic treatment using aligners, conventional metallic fixed
labial appliances, and lingual fixed appliances.
METHODS: A total of 60 patients, of which 20 patients were undergoing treatment
with aligners, 20 patients with labial fixed appliances, and 20 patients with
lingual fixed appliances, were included in our study. After 30 days, debonded
brackets and rinsed aligners were stored and processed for analysis with
checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization.
RESULTS: Most bacterial species showed moderate counts, with the exception of
Treponema denticola, which showed a higher count in all 3 types of appliances.
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and T denticola were present
in a higher percentage in the lingual appliance. Fusobacterium periodontium and
Prevotella intermedia were present in a higher percentage in the labial fixed
appliance. Campylobacter rectus, Tannerella forsythia, and Prevotella
melaninogenica counts were moderate in all 3 appliances, with the first 2
microbes showing slightly higher counts in aligners. The association between all 
the microorganisms were statistically insignificant, with the exception of
F nucleatum, which showed a strong statistically significant association in all 3
types of appliances.
CONCLUSIONS: The microbial contamination in metallic brackets was higher than
that of aligners, when used for a month. Lingual fixed appliances showed more
microbial contamination than labial fixed appliances followed by aligners.

Copyright © 2019 American Association of Orthodontists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajodo.2019.01.026 
PMID: 31901280  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

