
1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2020 Jan;312(1):5-23. doi: 10.1007/s00403-019-01968-z. Epub
2019 Aug 26.

Promising plant-derived secondary metabolites for treatment of acne vulgaris: a
mechanistic review.

Soleymani S(1), Farzaei MH(2), Zargaran A(3), Niknam S(4), Rahimi R(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traditional Pharmacy, School of Persian Medicine, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Health Institute, Kermanshah
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Department of History of Medicine, School of Persian Medicine, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Pharmaceutics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)Department of Traditional Pharmacy, School of Persian Medicine, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. rojarahimi@gmail.com.
(6)Evidence-Based Evaluation of Cost-Effectiveness and Clinical Outcomes, The
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (TIPS), Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. rojarahimi@gmail.com.

Acne vulgaris is the most common skin condition associated with inflammation of
pilosebaceous unit. Since conventional therapies have not demonstrated desirable 
effectiveness and possess remarkable side effects, there is a growing interest in
the use of herbal medicines for the management of acne vulgaris. In this study,
plant-derived molecules investigated in acne vulgaris have been reviewed and
their possible underlying mechanisms of action were discussed. For this purpose, 
different electronic databases including PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane library and
Google Scholar were searched to obtain any in vitro, in vivo, or human studies
evaluating the phytochemicals in the management of acne vulgaris. Data were
collected from 1980 to 2018 (up to October). Most of the phytochemicals
investigated in acne were from the category of polyphenols including resveratrol,
myricitrin, schisandrin, terchebulin, alpha-mangotin, curcumin, ellagic acid and 
epigallocatechin 3-gallate. Moreover, alkaloids and terpenoids such as berberine,
ursolic acid, lupeol were evaluated in acne vulgaris with less abundance. Various
molecular mechanisms were involved in effects of phytochemicals including
antioxidant (through down-regulation of H2O2, MDA, ROS and upregulation of SOD), 
anti-inflammatory (through reduction of proinflammatory cytokines, i.e., IL-1ß,
IL-6, IL-8, TGF-β, TNF-α, NF-κB), immunomodulatory, antibacterial (against
Propionibacterium acnes and Propionibacterium granulosum), antiandrogenic,
reducing sebum production, and lipogenesis inhibitory activities. Therefore,
phytochemicals seem to be a precious source for identifying new medicines for
treatment of acne vulgaris; however, since most of studies are preclinical,
further clinical studies are needed to achieve more conclusive and reliable
results.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-019-01968-z 
PMID: 31448393 

