
1. Transl Anim Sci. 2019 Dec 21;4(1):214-228. doi: 10.1093/tas/txz187. eCollection
2020 Jan.

In vitro evaluation of Lactobacillus plantarum as direct-fed microbials in
high-producing dairy cows diets.

Monteiro HF(1), Lelis ALJ(2), Brandao VLN(1), Faccenda A(3), Avila AS(4),
Arce-Cordero J(1), Silva LG(5), Dai X(1), Restelatto R(6), Carvalho P(7), Lima
LR(7), Faciola AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(2)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade de São Paulo, Pirassununga, SP,
Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade Estadual de Maringa, Maringa, PR,
Brazil.
(4)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade Estadual do Oeste do Parana, Marechal 
Candido Rondon, PR, Brazil.
(5)Centro APTA Bovinos de Corte, Instituto de Zootecnia, Sertaozinho, SP, Brazil.
(6)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade Federal do Parana, Curitiba, PR,
Brazil.
(7)Departamento de Zootecnia, Universidade Federal do Mato Grosso, Cuiaba, MT,
Brazil.

The objectives of this study were: 1) to compare the effects of live yeast (LY), 
yeast fermentation product (YFP), a mix of Lactobacillus acidophilus and
Propionibacterium freudenreichii (MLP), and Lactobacillus plantarum included as
additives in dairy cows' diets on in vitro ruminal fermentation and gas
production (GP); and 2) to evaluate the effects of L. plantarum as direct-fed
microbials (DFM) in dairy cows' diets on in vitro ruminal fermentation, GP,
nutrient digestibility, and N metabolism. Three experiments were carried out:
Exp. 1 had the objective to compare all additives regarding ruminal fermentation 
parameters: an Ankom GP system was used in a completely randomized design,
consisting of four 48 h incubations, and eight replications per treatment. There 
were eight treatments: a basal diet without additive (CTRL) or with one of the
following additives: LY, YFP, MLP, or L. plantarum at four levels (% of diet Dry 
Matter (DM)): 0.05% (L1), 0.10% (L2), 0.15% (L3), and 0.20% (L4). In Exp. 2, a
batch culture was used to evaluate ruminal fermentation, and CO2 and CH4
production using the same treatments and a similar experimental design, except
for having 16 replications per treatment. Based on Exp. 1 and 2 results, Exp. 3
aimed at evaluating the effects of the L. plantarum on ruminal true nutrient
digestibility and N utilization in order to evaluate the use of L. plantarum as
DFM. The treatments CTRL, MLP, L1, and L2 were used in a replicated 4 × 4 Latin
square design using a dual-flow continuous culture system. Data were analyzed
using linear and nonlinear regression; treatment means were compared through
contrasts, and L treatments in Exp. 1 and 2 were tested for linear, quadratic,
and cubic effects. In Exp. 1, all treatments containing additives tended to
reduce OM digestibility as well as reduced total volatile fatty acids (VFA)
concentration and total GP. The YFP had greater OM digestibility than LY, and MLP
treatment had greater total VFA concentration compared to L. plantarum
treatments. In Exp. 2, additives reduced CO2 production, and there were no major 
differences in CH4. In Exp. 3, all additives reduced NH3-N concentration. In
conclusion, pH and lactate concentration were not affected in all three
experiments regardless of additive tested, suggesting that these additives may
not improve ruminal fermentation by pH modulation; and L. plantarum may improve
ruminal N metabolism when used as DFM in high-producing dairy cows' diets, mainly
by reducing NH3-N concentration.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
American Society of Animal Science.

DOI: 10.1093/tas/txz187 
PMCID: PMC6994042
PMID: 32704981 

