
1. Exp Dermatol. 2020 Aug 10. doi: 10.1111/exd.14172. [Epub ahead of print]

Endocrinology and immunology of acne: Two sides of the same coin.

Zouboulis CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology, Venereology, Allergology and Immunology, Dessau
Medical Center, Brandenburg Medical School Theodor Fontane, Dessau, Germany.

Current experimental research on acne pathophysiology has revealed a more
complicated template than the classically reported four factor etiology. Cells of
the pilosebaceous unit, which represent the template for the developments of acne
lesions seem to be parallelly affected by endocrinological/metabolic factors as
well as inflammatory/immunological ones, which influence cooperate in sebocyte
differentiation/lipogenesis, holocrine secretion and sebum production. Indeed,
the unique programme of sebocyte terminal differentiation and death, the so
called holocrine secretion, is influenced by inflammatory and metabolic (lipid)
signaling with common denominator the selective regulation of peroxisome
proliferator-activared receptors. Autophagy provides substrates for energy
generation and biosynthesis of new cell structure proteins contributing to the
normally increased sebaceous gland metabolic functions, which are also regulated 
by extracellular calcium signaling, essential lipids and hormones. The ultimate
differentiation product of human sebocytes, sebum, co-regulates the inflammatory 
sebocyte status. Sebum composition is controlled among others by
Propionibacterium acnes and other bacteria, sexual hormones, neuropeptides,
endogenous opioids and environmental agents, which may function as endocrine
disruptors. Diet may also be an important source of substrate for the synthesis
of proinflammatory and antinflammatory sebaceous lipids. Sebum changes might
induce inflammation and initiate underlying immune mechanisms leading to acne
lesions. Current new therapeutic efforts on acne concentrate on
anti-inflammatory/immunologically active concepts, which are able to regulate
sebaceous lipogenesis. At last, current molecular studies based on published
molecular datasets confirmed the major role of inflammation in acne development.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14172 
PMID: 32779248 

