
1. J Lab Physicians. 2020 Mar;12(1):49-55. doi: 10.1055/s-0040-1714934. Epub 2020
Jul 24.

Bacterial Identification and Monitoring Around Two-Piece Dental Implants by
Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS).

Saha S(1), Meenawat A(1), Sahu C(2), Srivastava V(1), Yadav S(1), Kumar V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Implantology, Sardar Patel Post Graduate
Institute of Dental and Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

Context  Early microbiological diagnosis and treatment of periodontal pathogens
is important for successful retention of dental implants. Aims  This study aimed 
to identify and monitor oral bacterial colonization after successful two-piece
dental implants. Settings and Design  In this study, 50 two-piece dental implant 
subjects were included and assessed clinically, radiographically, and
microbiologically. Methods and Material  All the parameters were recorded at
various stages after prosthesis placement. In each stage, nonadherent
(peri-implant sulcular fluid) and adherent (curetted inner threads) samples were 
collected. Semiquantitative anaerobic culture of the samples were done in
Anoxomat system. Bacterial colonies were first identified by routine
microbiological methods and then by matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) method. Statistical
Analysis  All the results were analyzed by appropriate statistical methods
(Chi-square, one factor analysis of variance, etc.). Results  All the bacterial
isolates were identified in the MALDI-TOF MS system with no failure. After
implant placement for the nonadherent samples, the frequency (%) of Fusobacterium
nucleatum, Prevotella melaninogenica, and Propionibacterium acnes decreased
whereas frequency (%) of Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and
Streptococcus mitis increased. For adherent samples, the frequency (%) of E.
coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Porphyromonas gingivalis, P. melaninogenica , and
Veillonella parvula decreased, whereas frequency (%) of S. mitis and
Streptococcus mutans increased. The postimplant mean nonadherent and adherent
bacterial load increased with time but not significantly over the periods ( p =
0.302 and 0.123, respectively). Conclusion  Combination of basic
(semiquantitative culture method) and advanced microbiological method (MALDI-TOF 
MS) can be useful for accurate detection and monitoring of potential pathogens
around two-piece dental implants.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0040-1714934 
PMCID: PMC7419175
PMID: 32792794 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors declare no
conflict of interest.

