
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 7;11:1544. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01544. eCollection
2020.

Extracellular Vesicles Produced by the Probiotic Propionibacterium freudenreichii
CIRM-BIA 129 Mitigate Inflammation by Modulating the NF-κB Pathway.

Rodovalho VR(1)(2), da Luz BSR(1)(2), Rabah H(1), do Carmo FLR(2), Folador EL(3),
Nicolas A(1), Jardin J(1), Briard-Bion V(1), Blottière H(4), Lapaque N(4), Jan
G(1), Le Loir Y(1), de Carvalho Azevedo VA(2), Guédon E(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRAE, Institut Agro, STLO, Rennes, France.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biological
Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Biotechnology Center, Federal University of Paraíba, João Pessoa, Brazil.
(4)INRAE, AgroParisTech, Paris-Saclay University, Micalis Institute,
Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanometric spherical structures involved in
intercellular communication, whose production is considered to be a widespread
phenomenon in living organisms. Bacterial EVs are associated with several
processes that include survival, competition, pathogenesis, and immunomodulation.
Among probiotic Gram-positive bacteria, some Propionibacterium freudenreichii
strains exhibit anti-inflammatory activity, notably via surface proteins such as 
the surface-layer protein B (SlpB). We have hypothesized that, in addition to
surface exposure and secretion of proteins, P. freudenreichii may produce EVs and
thus export immunomodulatory proteins to interact with the host. In order to
demonstrate their production in this species, EVs were purified from cell-free
culture supernatants of the probiotic strain P. freudenreichii CIRM-BIA 129, and 
their physicochemical characterization, using transmission electron microscopy
and nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), revealed shapes and sizes typical of
EVs. Proteomic characterization showed that EVs contain a broad range of
proteins, including immunomodulatory proteins such as SlpB. In silico
protein-protein interaction predictions indicated that EV proteins could interact
with host proteins, including the immunomodulatory transcription factor NF-κB.
This potential interaction has a functional significance because EVs modulate
inflammatory responses, as shown by IL-8 release and NF-κB activity, in HT-29
human intestinal epithelial cells. Indeed, EVs displayed an anti-inflammatory
effect by modulating the NF-κB pathway; this was dependent on their concentration
and on the proinflammatory inducer (LPS-specific). Moreover, while this
anti-inflammatory effect partly depended on SlpB, it was not abolished by EV
surface proteolysis, suggesting possible intracellular sites of action for EVs.
This is the first report on identification of P. freudenreichii-derived EVs,
alongside their physicochemical, biochemical and functional characterization.
This study has enhanced our understanding of the mechanisms associated with the
probiotic activity of P. freudenreichii and identified opportunities to employ
bacterial-derived EVs for the development of bioactive products with therapeutic 
effects.

Copyright © 2020 Rodovalho, Luz, Rabah, do Carmo, Folador, Nicolas, Jardin,
Briard-Bion, Blottière, Lapaque, Jan, Le Loir, de Carvalho Azevedo and Guédon.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01544 
PMCID: PMC7359729
PMID: 32733422 

