
1. Int J Clin Pract. 2020 Aug 2:e13639. doi: 10.1111/ijcp.13639. [Epub ahead of
print]

Investigation of monocyte HDL ratio as an indicator of inflammation and complete 
blood count parameters in patients with acne vulgaris.

Turkmen D(1), Altunisik N(1), Sener S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Inonu University,
Battalgazi/Malatya, Turkey.

AIMS: Acne vulgaris is a common inflammatory skin disease that affects the
pilosebaceous unit. Increased sebum production, hyperkeratosis in follicular
infundibulum, inflammation and Propionibacterium acnes are among aetiological
factors. Complete blood count (CBC) parameters are used as diagnosis biomarkers
for many diseases related with inflammatory processes. Although monocyte/HDL
ratio (MHR) has been defined as an inflammatory marker recently, we did not come 
across any studies about MHR in acne, which is known to be an inflammatory
disease. The present study was conducted to compare CBC parameters and MHR levels
in acne vulgaris patients and healthy controls (HCs).
METHODS: Sixty-five acne vulgaris patients followed in our clinic between January
2018 and December 2019 and 36 HCs matching in terms of age and sex were included 
in the study. Patients and HCs were compared in terms of CBC parameters
[neutrophil, monocyte, platelet, lymphocyte, neutrophil/lymphocyte (NLR),
monocyte/lymphocyte (MLR), platelet/lymphocyte (PLR)], HDL and MHR ratio.
RESULTS: When compared with the HCs, acne vulgaris patients had statistically
significantly higher neutrophil, NLR ratio and HDL (P = .042, P = .011 and
P = .014, respectively). No statistically significant difference was found
between acne vulgaris patients and the HCs in terms of other CBC parameters and
MHR ratio (P > .05).
CONCLUSIONS: We believe that prospective studies consisting of large patient
series are needed to understand whether CBC parameters and MHR ratio can be used 
as an inflammatory marker in acne vulgaris patients.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijcp.13639 
PMID: 32741037 

