
1. Food Technol Biotechnol. 2020 Jun;58(2):115-127. doi: 10.17113/ftb.58.02.20.6356.

Propionic Acid: Method of Production, Current State and Perspectives.

Ranaei V(1), Pilevar Z(2), Khaneghah AM(3), Hosseini H(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, School of Public Health, Hamadan University of
Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.
(2)Student Research Committee, Department of Food Sciences and Technology
Department, National Nutrition and Food Technology Research Institute, Faculty of
Nutrition Sciences and Food Technology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran 1981619573, Iran.
(3)Department of Food Science, Faculty of Food Engineering, State University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Department of Food Sciences and Technology Department, National Nutrition and 
Food Technology Research Institute, Faculty of Nutrition Sciences and Food
Technology, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran 1981619573,
Iran.
(5)Food Safety Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.

During the past years, there has been a growing interest in the bioproduction of 
propionic acid by Propionibacterium. One of the major limitations of the existing
models lies in their low productivity yield. Hence, many strategies have been
proposed in order to circumvent this obstacle. This article provides a
comprehensive synthesis and review of important biotechnological aspects of
propionic acid production as a common ingredient in food and biotechnology
industries. We first discuss some of the most important production processes,
mainly focusing on biological production. Then, we provide a summary of important
propionic acid producers, including Propionibacterium freudenreichii and
Propionibacterium acidipropionici, as well as a wide range of reported
growth/production media. Furthermore, we describe bioprocess variables that can
have impact on the production yield. Finally, we propose methods for the
extraction and analysis of propionic acid and put forward strategies for
overcoming the limitations of competitive microbial production from the
economical point of view. Several factors influence the propionic acid
concentration and productivity such as culture conditions, type and bioreactor
scale; however, the pH value and temperature are the most important ones. Given
that there are many reports about propionic acid production from glucose, whey
permeate, glycerol, lactic acid, hemicelluloses, hydrolyzed corn meal, lactose,
sugarcane molasses and enzymatically hydrolyzed whole wheat flour, only few
review articles evaluate biotechnological aspects, i.e. bioprocess variables.

DOI: 10.17113/ftb.58.02.20.6356 
PMCID: PMC7416123
PMID: 32831564 

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.

