
1. Int Wound J. 2020 Aug 26. doi: 10.1111/iwj.13422. [Epub ahead of print]

Combination of urease inhibitor and antiseptic inhibits urea
decomposition-induced ammonia production by Proteus mirabilis.

Mugita Y(1), Nakagami G(1)(2), Minematsu T(2)(3), Kitamura A(1), Sanada H(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gerontological Nursing/Wound Care Management, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Global Nursing Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Skincare Science, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The decomposition of urea into ammonia by urease-producing bacterium shows an
elevation in the pH level, which can lead to incontinence-associated dermatitis
(IAD). This study aimed to examine the efficacy of a combination of antiseptic
and urease inhibitor in inhibiting the decomposition of urea by the
urease-producing bacterium Proteus mirabilis. We performed in vitro assays to
compare the effects of a combination of antiseptic and urease inhibitor,
antiseptic only, urease inhibitor only, and an untreated control with the effects
of a urea-containing solution. Cultured P. mirabilis was mixed with
urea-containing solution, followed by the addition of antiseptic and/or urease
inhibitor. The main outcome used to assess the efficacy of the different
treatments was ammonia concentration at 4-hours post-treatment initiation, and
multiple comparison analysis was performed using Dunnett's test to compare the
results between groups. Ammonia concentrations in samples treated with either
antiseptic or urease inhibitor were lower than those in the untreated control,
while the combination of antiseptic and urease inhibitor resulted in decreased
ammonia concentrations compared with either treatment alone. Therefore, the
application of both urease inhibitor and antiseptic is more effective for the
inhibition of urea decomposition by urease-producing bacteria. Novel preventive
strategies using these reagents may be effective for preventing IAD.

© 2020 Medicalhelplines.com Inc and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iwj.13422 
PMID: 32851777 

