
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Oct 1. pii: S0016-5085(20)35217-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.09.036. [Epub ahead of print]

Elucidation of Proteus mirabilis as a Key Bacterium in Crohn's Disease
Inflammation.

Zhang J(1), Hoedt EC(2), Liu Q(1), Berendsen E(3), Teh JJ(3), Hamilton A(4), O'
Brien AW(4), Ching J(1), Wei H(5), Yang K(1), Xu Z(1), Wong SH(6), Mak JW(1),
Sung JJ(1), Morrison M(7), Yu J(8), Kamm MA(9), Ng SC(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease, State
Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health Science, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia; APC Microbiome Ireland,
University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia;
Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Department of Laboratory Animal Science at the Third Military Medical
University in Chongqing, China.
(6)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease, State
Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health Science, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Center for Gut Microbiota
Research, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(7)The University of Queensland Diamantina Institute, Faculty of Medicine,
Translational Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. Electronic address:
m.morrison1@uq.edu.au.
(8)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease, State
Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health Science, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Center for Gut Microbiota
Research, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: junyu@cuhk.edu.hk.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia;
Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
Electronic address: mkamm@unimelb.edu.au.
(10)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease,
State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, LKS Institute of Health Science, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Center for Gut Microbiota
Research, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address: siewchienng@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Proteus spp., Gram-negative facultative anaerobic bacilli,
have recently been associated with Crohn's disease (CD) recurrence after
intestinal resection. We investigated the genomic and functional role of Proteus 
as a gut pathogen in CD.
METHODS: Proteus spp. abundance was assessed by ure gene-specific PCR in 54 pairs
of faecal samples and 101 intestinal biopsies from CD patients and healthy
controls. The adherence, invasion and intra-cellular presence of two distinct
isolates of P. mirabilis in epithelial cells were evaluated using
immunofluorescence and electron microscopy. Intracellular gene expression
profiles and regulated pathways were analyzed by RNA seq and KEGG pathway
analysis. Biological functions of two isolates of P. mirabilis were determined by
in vitro cell culture, and in vivo using conventional mice and germ-free mice.
RESULTS: Proteus spp. were significantly more prevalent and abundant in faecal
samples and colonic tissue of patients with CD than controls. A greater abundance
of the genus Fusobacterium and a lesser abundance of the genus Faecalibacterium
were seen in CD patients with a high Proteus spp. abundance. All 24
Proteus-monoclones isolated from CD patients belonged to members of P. mirabilis 
lineages and two isolates, recovered from stool or mucosa, were used in further
studies. Mice gavaged with either P. mirabilis strain had more severe colonic
inflammation. Co-culture of the isolates with epithelial cell lines showed
bacterial adherence, invasion, increased production of pro-inflammatory cytokines
IL-18 and IL-1α, and cell necrosis. Both isolates induced key pro-inflammatory
pathways including NOD-like receptor signaling, Jak-STAT signaling and MAPK
signaling, and induced pro-inflammatory genes and activated inflammation-related 
pathways in gnotobiotic mice.
CONCLUSION: P. mirabilis in the gut is associated with CD and can induce
inflammation in cells and animal models of colitis. P. mirabilis may act as a
pathobiont and play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of CD.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.09.036 
PMID: 33011176 

