
1. PLoS One. 2019 Oct 24;14(10):e0224440. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224440.
eCollection 2019.

Consequences of chronic bacterial infection in Drosophila melanogaster.

Chambers MC(1)(2), Jacobson E(1), Khalil S(1), Lazzaro BP(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, United States 
of America.
(2)Department of Biology, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA, United States of
America.
(3)Cornell Institute of Host-Microbe Interactions and Disease, Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York, United States of America.

Even when successfully surviving an infection, a host often fails to eliminate a 
pathogen completely and may sustain substantial pathogen burden for the remainder
of its life. Using systemic bacterial infection in Drosophila melanogaster, we
characterize chronic infection by three bacterial species from different genera -
Providencia rettgeri, Serratia marcescens, and Enterococcus faecalis-following
inoculation with a range of doses. To assess the consequences of these chronic
infections, we determined the expression of antimicrobial peptide genes, survival
of secondary infection, and starvation resistance after one week of infection.
While higher infectious doses unsurprisingly lead to higher risk of death, they
also result in higher chronic bacterial loads among the survivors for all three
infections. All three chronic infections caused significantly elevated expression
of antimicrobial peptide genes at one week post-infection and provided
generalized protection again secondary bacterial infection. Only P. rettgeri
infection significantly influenced resistance to starvation, with persistently
infected flies dying more quickly under starvation conditions relative to
controls. These results suggest that there is potentially a generalized mechanism
of protection against secondary infection, but that other impacts on host
physiology may depend on the specific pathogen. We propose that chronic
infections in D. melanogaster could be a valuable tool for studying tolerance of 
infection, including impacts on host physiology and behavior.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224440 
PMCID: PMC6812774
PMID: 31648237  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

