
1. Braz J Infect Dis. 2020 May - Jun;24(3):231-238. doi: 10.1016/j.bjid.2020.03.002.
Epub 2020 Apr 21.

Mobile genetic elements associated with carbapenemase genes in South American
Enterobacterales.

Reyes JA(1), Melano R(2), Cárdenas PA(3), Trueba G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y
Ambientales, Instituto de Microbiología, Quito, Ecuador; Universidad Central del 
Ecuador, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Quito, Ecuador. Electronic address:
jorgereyes83@gmail.com.
(2)Public Health Ontario, Toronto, Canada; University of Toronto, Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Toronto, Canada.
(3)Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y
Ambientales, Instituto de Microbiología, Quito, Ecuador.

INTRODUCTION: Carbapenem resistance in members of order Enterobacterales is a
growing public health problem causing high mortality in developing and
industrialized countries. Its emergence and rapid propagation worldwide was due
to both intercontinental spread of pandemic strains and horizontal dissemination 
via mobile genetic elements (MGE) such as plasmids and transposons.
OBJECTIVE: To describe MGE carrying carbapenem resistance genes in
Enterobacterales which have been reported in South America.
SEARCH STRATEGY AND SELECTION CRITERIA: A search of the literature in English or 
Spanish published until 2019 in PubMed, Google Scholar, LILACS and SciELO
databases was performed for studies of MGE in Enterobacterales reported in South 
American countries.
RESULTS: Seven South American countries reported MGE related to carbapenemases.
Carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae belonging to clonal complex 258
were the most prevalent pathogens reported; others carbapenemase-producing
Enterobacterales such as Escherichia coli, Serratia marcescens, and Providencia
rettgeri also have been reported. The MGE implicated in the spread of the most
prevalent carbapenemase genes are Tn4401 and non-Tn4401 elements for blaKPC and
ISAba125 for blaNDM, located in different plasmid incompatibility groups, i.e.
L/M, A/C, FII and bacterial clones.
CONCLUSION: This review indicates that, like in other parts of the world, the
most commonly reported carbapenemases in Enterobacterales from South America are 
being disseminated through clones, plasmids, and transposons which have been
previously reported in other parts of the world.

Copyright © 2020 Sociedade Brasileira de Infectologia. Published by Elsevier
España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bjid.2020.03.002 
PMID: 32325019  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

