
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Aug 25;202(18). pii: e00248-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00248-20. Print
2020 Aug 25.

Structural and Biochemical Analyses Reveal that Chlorogenic Acid Inhibits the
Shikimate Pathway.

Neetu N(1), Katiki M(1), Dev A(1), Gaur S(1), Tomar S(1), Kumar P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, 
Uttarakhand, India pravindra.kumar@bt.iitr.ac.in.

Chlorogenic acid (CGA) is a phenolic compound with well-known antibacterial
properties against pathogens. In this study, structural and biochemical
characterization was used to show the inhibitory role of CGA against the enzyme
of the shikimate pathway, a well-characterized drug target in several pathogens. 
Here, we report the crystal structures of dehydroquinate synthase (DHQS), the
second enzyme of the shikimate pathway, from Providencia alcalifaciens (PaDHQS), 
in binary complex with NAD and ternary complex with NAD and CGA. Structural
analyses reveal that CGA occupies the substrate position in the active site of
PaDHQS, which disables domain movements, leaving the enzyme in an open and
catalysis-incompetent state. The binding analyses by isothermal titration
calorimetry (ITC) and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) show that CGA binds to
PaDHQS with KD (equilibrium dissociation constant) values of 6.3 μM and 0.5 μM,
respectively. In vitro enzyme inhibition studies show that CGA inhibits PaDHQS
with a Ki of 235 ± 21 μM, while it inhibits the growth of Providencia
alcalifaciens, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus, and Escherichia coli
with MIC values of 60 to 100 μM. In the presence of aromatic amino acids supplied
externally, CGA does not show the toxic effect. These results, along with the
observations of the inhibition of the 3-deoxy-d-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate
(DAHP) regulatory domain by CGA in our previous study, suggest that CGA binds to 
shikimate pathway enzymes with high affinity and inhibits their catalysis and can
be further exploited for designing novel drug-like molecules.IMPORTANCE The
shikimate pathway is an attractive target for the development of herbicides and
antimicrobial agents, as it is essential in plants, bacteria, and apicomplexan
parasites but absent in humans. The enzymes of shikimate pathway are conserved
among bacteria. Thus, the inhibitors of the shikimate pathway act on wide range
of pathogens. We have identified that chlorogenic acid targets the enzymes of the
shikimate pathway. The crystal structure of dehydroquinate synthase, the second
enzyme of the pathway, in complex with chlorogenic acid and enzymatic inhibition 
studies explains the mechanism of inhibition of chlorogenic acid. These results
suggest that chlorogenic acid has a good chemical scaffold and have important
implications for its further development as a potent inhibitor of shikimate
pathway enzymes.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00248-20 
PMID: 32661075 

