
1. mSystems. 2020 Apr 28;5(2). pii: e00134-20. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00134-20.

Deciphering the Structural Diversity and Classification of the Mobile Tigecycline
Resistance Gene tet(X)-Bearing Plasmidome among Bacteria.

Li R(1)(2)(3), Lu X(1)(2), Peng K(1)(2)(3), Liu Z(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2)(3), Liu
Y(1)(2)(3), Xiao X(1)(2), Wang Z(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.
(2)Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal
Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou, Jiangsu, People's Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Comparative Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu,
People's Republic of China zqwang@yzu.edu.cn.

The emergence of novel plasmid-mediated resistance genes constitutes a great
public concern. Recently, mobile tet(X) variants were reported in diverse
pathogens from different sources. However, the diversity of tet(X)-bearing
plasmids remains largely unknown. In this study, the phenotypes and genotypes of 
all the tet(X)-positive tigecycline-resistant strains isolated from a
slaughterhouse in China were characterized by antimicrobial susceptibility
testing, conjugation, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis with S1 nuclease
(S1-PFGE), and PCR. The diversity and polymorphism of tet(X)-harboring strains
and plasmidomes were investigated by whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and
single-plasmid-molecule analysis. Seventy-four tet(X4)-harboring Escherichia coli
strains and one tet(X6)-bearing Providencia rettgeri strain were identified. The 
tet(X4)-bearing elements in 27 strains could be transferred to the recipient
strain via plasmids. All tet(X4)-bearing plasmids isolated in this study and 15
tet(X4)-bearing plasmids reported online were analyzed. tet(X4)-bearing plasmids 
ranged from 9 to 294 kb and were categorized as ColE2-like, IncQ, IncX1, IncA/C2,
IncFII, IncFIB, and hybrid plasmids with different replicons. The core
tet(X4)-bearing genetic contexts were divided into four major groups:
ISCR2-tet(X4)-abh, △ISCR2-abh-tet(X4)-ISCR2, ISCR2-abh-tet(X4)-ISCR2-virD2-floR, 
and abh-tet(X4)-ISCR2-yheS-cat-zitR-ISCR2-virD2-floR Tandem repeats of tet(X4)
were universally mediated by ISCR2 Different tet(X)-bearing strains existed in
the same microbiota. Reorganization of tet(X4)-bearing multidrug resistance
plasmids was found to be mediated by IS26 and other homologous regions. Finally, 
single-plasmid-molecule analysis captured the heterogenous state of
tet(X4)-bearing plasmids. These findings significantly expand our knowledge of
the tet(X)-bearing plasmidome among microbiotas, which establishes a baseline for
investigating the structure and diversity of human, animal, and environmental
tigecycline resistomes. Characterization of tet(X) genes among different
microbiotas should be performed systematically to understand the evolution and
ecology.IMPORTANCE Tigecycline is an expanded-spectrum tetracycline used as a
last-resort antimicrobial for treating infections caused by superbugs such as
carbapenemase-producing or colistin-resistant pathogens. Emergence of the
plasmid-mediated mobile tigecycline resistance gene tet(X4) created a great
public health concern. However, the diversity of tet(X4)-bearing plasmids and
bacteria remains largely uninvestigated. To cover this knowledge gap, we
comprehensively identified and characterized the tet(X)-bearing plasmidome in
different sources using advanced sequencing technologies for the first time. The 
huge diversity of tet(X4)-bearing mobile elements demonstrates the high level of 
transmissibility of the tet(X4) gene among bacteria. It is crucial to enhance
stringent surveillance of tet(X) genes in animal and human pathogens globally.

Copyright © 2020 Li et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00134-20 
PMCID: PMC7190383
PMID: 32345737 

