
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Sep 29. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15243. [Epub ahead of
print]

Determining the prevalence, identity and possible origin of bacterial pathogens
in soil.

Ferraresso J(1)(2), Lawton B(1), Bayliss S(3), Sheppard S(3), Cardazzo B(2), Gaze
W(1), Buckling A(4), Vos M(1).

Author information: 
(1)European Centre for Environment and Human Health, University of Exeter Medical
School, Environment and Sustainability Institute, Penryn Campus, TR10 9FE, United
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Comparative Biomedicine and Food Science, University of Padova, 
Legnaro (Pd), Italy.
(3)The Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, BA2 7BA, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biosciences, University of Exeter, Penryn Campus, TR10 9FE, UK.

Soil biomes are vast, exceptionally diverse and crucial to the health of
ecosystems and societies. Soils also contain an appreciable, but understudied,
diversity of opportunistic human pathogens. With climate change and other forms
of environmental degradation potentially increasing exposure risks to soilborne
pathogens, it is necessary to gain a better understanding of their ecological
drivers. Here we use the Galleria mellonella insect virulence model to
selectively isolate pathogenic bacteria from soils in Cornwall (United Kingdom). 
We find a high prevalence of pathogenic soil bacteria with two genera,
Providencia and Serratia, being especially common. Providencia alcalifaciens, P. 
rustigianii, Serratia liquefaciens and S. plymuthica strains were studied in more
detail using phenotypic virulence- and antibiotic resistance assays and
whole-genome sequencing. Both genera displayed low levels of antibiotic
resistance and antibiotic resistance gene carriage. However, Serratia isolates
were found to carry the recently characterised metallo-β-lactamase blaSPR-1 that,
although not conferring high levels of resistance in these strains, poses a
potential risk of horizontal transfer to other pathogens where it could be fully 
functional. The Galleria assay can be a useful approach to uncover the
distribution and identity of pathogenic bacteria in the environment, as well as
uncover resistance genes with an environmental origin. This article is protected 
by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15243 
PMID: 32990385 

