
1. mSphere. 2020 May 27;5(3). pii: e00412-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00412-20.

Transposon Insertion Site Sequencing of Providencia stuartii: Essential Genes,
Fitness Factors for Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infection, and the Impact
of Polymicrobial Infection on Fitness Requirements.

Johnson AO(1), Forsyth V(2), Smith SN(2), Learman BS(1), Brauer AL(1), White
AN(1), Zhao L(3), Wu W(4), Mobley HLT(2), Armbruster CE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 
USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan School of Public Health,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan 
Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York, 
USA chelsiea@buffalo.edu.

Providencia stuartii is a common cause of polymicrobial catheter-associated
urinary tract infection (CAUTI), and yet literature describing the molecular
mechanisms of its pathogenesis is limited. To identify factors important for
colonization during single-species infection and during polymicrobial infection
with a common cocolonizer, Proteus mirabilis, we created a saturating library of 
∼50,000 transposon mutants and conducted transposon insertion site sequencing
(Tn-Seq) in a murine model of CAUTI. P. stuartii strain BE2467 carries 4,398
genes, 521 of which were identified as essential for growth in laboratory medium 
and therefore could not be assessed for contribution to infection. Using an
input/output fold change cutoff value of 20 and P values of <0.05, 340 genes were
identified as important for establishing single-species infection only and 63
genes as uniquely important for polymicrobial infection with P. mirabilis, and
168 genes contributed to both single-species and coinfection. Seven mutants were 
constructed for experimental validation of the primary screen that corresponded
to flagella (fliC mutant), twin arginine translocation (tatC), an ATP-dependent
protease (clpP), d-alanine-d-alanine ligase (ddlA), type 3 secretion (yscI and
sopB), and type VI secretion (impJ). Infection-specific phenotypes validated 6/7 
(86%) mutants during direct cochallenge with wild-type P. stuartii and 3/5 (60%) 
mutants during coinfection with P. mirabilis, for a combined validation rate of
9/12 (75%). Tn-Seq therefore successfully identified genes that contribute to
fitness of P. stuartii within the urinary tract, determined the impact of
coinfection on fitness requirements, and added to the identification of a
collection of genes that may contribute to fitness of multiple urinary tract
pathogens.IMPORTANCE Providencia stuartii is a common cause of polymicrobial
catheter-associated urinary tract infections (CAUTIs), particularly during
long-term catheterization. However, little is known regarding the pathogenesis of
this organism. Using transposon insertion site sequencing (Tn-Seq), we performed 
a global assessment of P. stuartii fitness factors for CAUTI while simultaneously
determining how coinfection with another pathogen alters fitness requirements.
This approach provides four important contributions to the field: (i) the first
global estimation of P. stuartii genes essential for growth in laboratory medium,
(ii) identification of novel fitness factors for P. stuartii colonization of the 
catheterized urinary tract, (iii) identification of core fitness factors for both
single-species and polymicrobial CAUTI, and (iv) assessment of conservation of
fitness factors between common uropathogens. Genomewide assessment of the fitness
requirements for common uropathogens during single-species and polymicrobial
CAUTI thus elucidates complex interactions that contribute to disease severity
and will uncover conserved targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2020 Johnson et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00412-20 
PMCID: PMC7253602
PMID: 32461277 

