
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jun 17;86(13). pii: e00073-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00073-20. Print 2020 Jun 17.

A Tailspike with Exopolysaccharide Depolymerase Activity from a New Providencia
stuartii Phage Makes Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria Susceptible to Serum-Mediated
Killing.

Oliveira H(1), Pinto G(2), Mendes B(2)(3), Dias O(2), Hendrix H(4), Akturk E(2), 
Noben JP(5), Gawor J(6), Łobocka M(7), Lavigne R(4), Azeredo J(1).

Author information: 
(1)CEB-Centre of Biological Engineering, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal
hugooliveira@deb.uminho.pt jazeredo@deb.uminho.pt.
(2)CEB-Centre of Biological Engineering, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(3)Centro de Biotecnologia Agricola e Agro-Alimentar do Alentejo (CEBAL),
Instituto Politécnico de Beja (IPBeja), Beja, Portugal.
(4)Laboratory of Gene Technology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Biomedical Research Institute and Transnational University Limburg, Hasselt
University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(6)Laboratory of DNA Sequencing and Oligonucleotide Synthesis, Institute of
Biochemistry and Biophysics of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Microbial Biochemistry, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics
of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Providencia stuartii is emerging as a significant drug-resistant nosocomial
pathogen, which encourages the search for alternative therapies. Here, we have
isolated Providencia stuartii phage Stuart, a novel podovirus infecting
multidrug-resistant hospital isolates of this bacterium. Phage Stuart is a
proposed member of a new Autographivirinae subfamily genus, with a 41,218-bp
genome, direct 345-bp repeats at virion DNA ends, and limited sequence similarity
of proteins to proteins in databases. Twelve out of the 52 predicted Stuart
proteins are virion components. We found one to be a tailspike with depolymerase 
activity. The tailspike could form a highly thermostable oligomeric β-structure
migrating close to the expected trimer in a nondenaturing gel. It appeared to be 
essential for the infection of three out of four P. stuartii hosts infected by
phage Stuart. Moreover, it degraded the exopolysaccharide of relevant phage
Stuart hosts, making the bacteria susceptible to serum killing. Prolonged
exposure of a sensitive host to the tailspike did not cause the emergence of
bacteria resistant to the phage or to serum killing, opposite to the prolonged
exposure to the phage. This indicates that phage tail-associated depolymerases
are attractive antivirulence agents that could complement the immune system in
the fight with P. stuartii IMPORTANCE The pace at which multidrug-resistant
strains emerge has been alarming. P. stuartii is an infrequent but relevant
drug-resistant nosocomial pathogen causing local to systemic life-threatening
infections. We propose an alternative approach to fight this bacterium based on
the properties of phage tailspikes with depolymerase activity that degrade the
surface bacterial polymers, making the bacteria susceptible to the immune system.
Unlike antibiotics, phage tailspikes have narrow and specific substrate spectra, 
and by acting as antivirulent but not bactericidal agents they do not cause the
selection of resistant bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00073-20 
PMCID: PMC7301845 [Available on 2020-12-17]
PMID: 32357999 

