
1. PeerJ. 2020 Aug 11;8:e9543. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9543. eCollection 2020.

Antibacterial activity and mechanism of sanguinarine against Providencia rettgeri
in vitro.

Zhang Q(1)(2)(3)(4), Lyu Y(1), Huang J(1), Zhang X(1), Yu N(1), Wen Z(1), Chen
S(3)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Shenzhen University General Hospital, Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, China.
(2)College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University,
Shenzhen, China.
(3)Shenzhen University Health Science Center, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Dermatology, PLAGH Hainan Hospital Of PLA General Hospital,
Sanya, China.
(5)Department of Immunology, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen,
China.

Background: Sanguinarine (SAG), a benzophenanthridine alkaloid, occurs in
Papaveraceas, Berberidaceae and Ranunculaceae families. Studies have found that
SAG has antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiproliferative activities in
several malignancies and that it exhibits robust antibacterial activities.
However, information reported on the action of SAG against Providencia rettgeri
is limited in the literature. Therefore, the present study aimed to evaluate the 
antimicrobial and antibiofilm activities of SAG against P. rettgeri in vitro.
Methods: The agar dilution method was used to determine the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of SAG against P. rettgeri. The intracellular ATP
concentration, intracellular pH (pHin), and cell membrane integrity and potential
were measured. Confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), field emission scanning
electron microscopy (FESEM), and crystal violet staining were used to measure the
antibiofilm formation of SAG.
Results: The MIC of SAG against P. rettgeri was 7.8 μg/mL. SAG inhibited the
growth of P. rettgeri and destroyed the integrity of P. rettgeri cell membrane,
as reflected mainly through the decreases in the intracellular ATP concentration,
pHin and cell membrane potential and significant changes in cellular morphology. 
The findings of CLSM, FESEM and crystal violet staining indicated that SAG
exhibited strong inhibitory effects on the biofilm formation of P. rettgeri and
led to the inactivity of biofilm-related P. rettgeri cells.

© 2020 Zhang et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9543 
PMCID: PMC7427548
PMID: 32864203 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.

