
1. Enzymes. 2020;47:399-425. doi: 10.1016/bs.enz.2020.05.011. Epub 2020 Jul 18.

Styrene monooxygenases, indole monooxygenases and related flavoproteins applied
in bioremediation and biocatalysis.

Tischler D(1), Kumpf A(2), Eggerichs D(3), Heine T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany. Electronic address:
dirk.tischler@rub.de.
(2)Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany; Environmental Microbiology, Faculty of 
Chemistry and Physics, TU Bergakademie Freiberg, Freiberg, Germany.
(3)Microbial Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(4)Environmental Microbiology, Faculty of Chemistry and Physics, TU Bergakademie 
Freiberg, Freiberg, Germany.

Styrene and indole are naturally occurring compounds, which are also produced and
processed by various chemical industries. Thus, it is not surprisingly that
microorganisms evolved pathways to detoxify or even to utilize those compounds as
carbon sources. Especially, among bacteria several routes are described
specifically for the activation and degradation of styrene and indole.
Respectively, the initial attack toward these compounds occurs via a
flavin-dependent monooxygenase: styrene monooxygenase (SMO) or indole
monooxygenase (IMO). In the first place, SMOs have been described to initiate a
styrene specific degradation. These are in general two-component systems, whereas
a small FAD-reductase (SMOB) delivers reduced FAD on the expense of NADH toward
the monooxygenase (SMOA). Various modes of interaction are possible and for both 
mostly dimeric protein subunits structural data were reported. Thus, this
flavoprotein monooxygenase-especially the one from Pseudomonas putida S12 can be 
seen as the prototype of this class of enzymes. In the course of describing
related members of this enzyme family some remarkable findings were made. For
example, self-sufficient fusion proteins have been reported as well as enzymes,
which could not be assigned to a styrene metabolic activity, rather to indole
conversion. Later it was found that this flavoprotein group can be separated at
least into two subgroups: styrene and indole monooxygenases. And both enzymes
rely on a FAD-reductase to obtain the reduced cofactor (FADred), which is
employed to activate molecular oxygen toward hydroperoxy-FAD, which allows
substrate epoxidation and the formation of hydroxy-FAD, which finally yields H2O 
and oxidized FAD.

© 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.enz.2020.05.011 
PMID: 32951830 

