
1. ISME J. 2020 Oct 3. doi: 10.1038/s41396-020-00794-w. [Epub ahead of print]

Phage gene expression and host responses lead to infection-dependent costs of
CRISPR immunity.

Meaden S(1), Capria L(2), Alseth E(2), Gandon S(3), Biswas A(4), Lenzi L(5), van 
Houte S(2), Westra ER(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, TR10 9EZ, UK.
s.meaden@exeter.ac.uk.
(2)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, TR10 9EZ, UK.
(3)CEFE, Univ Montpellier, CNRS, EPHE, IRD, Univ Paul Valéry Montpellier 3,
Montpellier, France.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand.
(5)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(6)Biosciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, TR10 9EZ, UK.
e.r.westra@exeter.ac.uk.

CRISPR-Cas immune systems are widespread in bacteria and archaea, but not
ubiquitous. Previous work has demonstrated that CRISPR immunity is associated
with an infection-induced fitness cost, which may help explain the patchy
distribution observed. However, the mechanistic basis of this cost has remained
unclear. Using Pseudomonas aeruginosa PA14 and its phage DMS3vir as a model, we
perform a 30-day evolution experiment under phage mediated selection. We
demonstrate that although CRISPR is initially selected for, bacteria carrying
mutations in the phage receptor rapidly invade the population following
subsequent reinfections. We then test three potential mechanisms for the observed
cost of CRISPR: (1) autoimmunity from the acquisition of self-targeting spacers, 
(2) immunopathology or energetic costs from increased cas gene expression and (3)
toxicity caused by phage gene expression prior to CRISPR-mediated cleavage. We
find that phages can express genes before the immune system clears the infection 
and that expression of these genes can have a negative effect on host fitness.
While infection does not lead to increased expression of cas genes, it does cause
differential expression of multiple other host processes that may further
contribute to the cost of CRISPR immunity. In contrast, we found little support
for infection-induced autoimmunological and immunopathological effects. Phage
gene expression prior to cleavage of the genome by the CRISPR-Cas immune system
is therefore the most parsimonious explanation for the observed phage-induced
fitness cost.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-020-00794-w 
PMID: 33011743 

