
1. Arch Microbiol. 2020 Aug 13. doi: 10.1007/s00203-020-01991-z. [Epub ahead of
print]

Maximizing growth and productivity of onion (Allium cepa L.) by Spirulina
platensis extract and nitrogen-fixing endophyte Pseudomonas stutzeri.

Geries LSM(1), Elsadany AY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Onion Res. Dept., Field Crops Research Institute, Agric. Res. Center, Giza,
Egypt.
(2)Cyanobacteria Lab., Microbiology Dept., Sakha Agricultural Research Station,
Soils, Water and Environment Research Institute, Agric. Res. Center, Giza, Egypt.
cyanogawad@gmail.com.

The study focuses on the impact of foliar spraying cyanobacterium Spirulina
platensis extract and the inoculation with the endophyte N2-fixing Pseudomonas
stutzeri, and their mixture in the presence of different nitrogen doses on growth
and yield of onion under field conditions. Bioactive compounds of Spirulina and
Pseudomonas were analyzed by GC-MC and amino acid production of Spirulina by the 
amino acid analyzer. Hydrogen cyanide (HCN), indole acetic acid (IAA), ammonia
(NH3), pectinase activity, and N2-fixation of Pseudomonas were measured. Plant
height (cm), leaf length (cm), number of green leaves, bulb diameter (cm), fresh 
and dry weight of plant (g), chlorophyll a, b of leaves, bulb weight (g),
marketable bulb yield (t. ha-1), cull bulb weight (t. ha-1), total bulb yield (t.
ha-1), bulb diameter (cm), total soluble solids (TSS%), dry matter content (DM%),
evaluation of storage behavior, and economic feasibility were estimated.
Spirulina extract has several bioactive compounds. Pseudomonas can produce HCN,
NH3, IAA, pectinase, and nitrogen fixation. The application of mixture with
recommended dose of nitrogen increases the onion plant parameters, marketable
yield, total bulb yield, bulb weight, bulb diameter, TSS%, DM%, net return,
benefit-cost ratio (B:C), lowest cumulative weight loss% of bulbs during storage,
and reduce culls weight compared with other treatments in two seasons.
Application of S. platensis extract and inoculation with endophyte
nitrogen-fixing P. stutzeri enhance the growth and productivity of the onion
under different doses of nitrogen fertilizer.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-020-01991-z 
PMID: 32789754 

