
1. Front Bioeng Biotechnol. 2020 Aug 20;8:976. doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00976.
eCollection 2020.

Integration of Genetic and Process Engineering for Optimized Rhamnolipid
Production Using Pseudomonas putida.

Tiso T(1)(2), Ihling N(2)(3), Kubicki S(2)(4), Biselli A(2)(5), Schonhoff
A(2)(6), Bator I(1)(2), Thies S(2)(4), Karmainski T(1)(2), Kruth S(1)(2),
Willenbrink AL(2)(5), Loeschcke A(2)(4), Zapp P(2)(6), Jupke A(2)(5), Jaeger
KE(2)(4)(7), Büchs J(2)(3), Blank LM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)iAMB - Institute of Applied Microbiology, ABBt - Aachen Biology and
Biotechnology, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Bioeconomy Science Center (BioSC), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich,
Germany.
(3)Chair of Biochemical Engineering (AVT.BioVT), RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular Enzyme Technology, Heinrich-Heine-Universität
Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Fluid Process Engineering (AVT.FVT), RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Energy and Climate Research - Systems Analysis and Technology
Evaluation (IEK-STE), Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.
(7)Institute of Bio- and Geosciences IBG 1: Biotechnology, Forschungszentrum
Jülich GmbH, Jülich, Germany.

Rhamnolipids are biosurfactants produced by microorganisms with the potential to 
replace synthetic compounds with petrochemical origin. To promote industrial use 
of rhamnolipids, recombinant rhamnolipid production from sugars needs to be
intensified. Since this remains challenging, the aim of the presented research is
to utilize a multidisciplinary approach to take a step toward developing a
sustainable rhamnolipid production process. Here, we developed expression
cassettes for stable integration of the rhamnolipid biosynthesis genes into the
genome outperformed plasmid-based expression systems. Furthermore, the genetic
stability of the production strain was improved by using an inducible promoter.
To enhance rhamnolipid synthesis, energy- and/or carbon-consuming traits were
removed: mutants negative for the synthesis of the flagellar machinery or the
storage polymer PHA showed increased production by 50%. Variation of time of
induction resulted in an 18% increase in titers. A scale-up from shake flasks was
carried out using a 1-L bioreactor. By recycling of the foam, biomass loss could 
be minimized and a rhamnolipid titer of up to 1.5 g/L was achieved without using 
mechanical foam destroyers or antifoaming agents. Subsequent liquid-liquid
extraction was optimized by using a suitable minimal medium during fermentation
to reduce undesired interphase formation. A technical-scale production process
was designed and evaluated by a life-cycle assessment (LCA). Different process
chains and their specific environmental impact were examined. It was found that
next to biomass supply, the fermentation had the biggest environmental impact.
The present work underlines the need for multidisciplinary approaches to address 
the challenges associated with achieving sustainable production of microbial
secondary metabolites. The results are discussed in the context of the challenges
of microbial biosurfactant production using hydrophilic substrates on an
industrial scale.

Copyright © 2020 Tiso, Ihling, Kubicki, Biselli, Schonhoff, Bator, Thies,
Karmainski, Kruth, Willenbrink, Loeschcke, Zapp, Jupke, Jaeger, Büchs and Blank.

DOI: 10.3389/fbioe.2020.00976 
PMCID: PMC7468518
PMID: 32974309 

