
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18;11:1974. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01974. eCollection 
2020.

Resistance to Bipyridyls Mediated by the TtgABC Efflux System in Pseudomonas
putida KT2440.

Henríquez T(1), Stein NV(1), Jung H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mikrobiologie, Biozentrum, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich,
Germany.

Resistance-nodulation-division (RND) transporters are involved in antibiotic
resistance and have a broad substrate specificity. However, the physiological
significance of these efflux pumps is not fully understood. Here, we have
investigated the role of the RND system TtgABC in resistance to metal ion
chelators in the soil bacterium Pseudomonas putida KT2440. We observed that the
combined action of an RND inhibitor and the chelator 2,2'-bipyridyl inhibited
bacterial growth. In addition, the deletion of ttgB made the strain susceptible
to 2,2'-bipyridyl and natural bipyridyl derivatives such as caerulomycin A,
indicating that TtgABC is required for detoxification of compounds of the
bipyridyl family. Searching for the basis of growth inhibition by bipyridyls, we 
found reduced adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels in the ttgB mutant compared to 
the wild type. Furthermore, the expression of genes related to iron acquisition
and the synthesis of the siderophore pyoverdine were reduced in the mutant
compared to the wild type. Investigating the possibility that 2,2'-bipyridyl in
the ttgB mutant mediates iron accumulation in cells (which would cause the
upregulation of genes involved in oxidative stress via the Fenton reaction), we
measured the expression of genes coding for proteins involved in intracellular
iron storage and the response to oxidative stress. However, none of the genes was
significantly upregulated. In a further search for a possible link between
2,2'-bipyridyl and the observed phenotypes, we considered the possibility that
the ion chelator limits the intracellular availability of metabolically important
metal ions. In this context, we found that the addition of copper restores the
growth of the ttgB mutant and the production of pyoverdine, suggesting a
relationship between copper availability and iron acquisition. Taken together,
the results suggest that detoxification of metal chelating compounds of the
bipyridyl family produced by other bacteria or higher ordered organisms is one of
the native functions of the RND efflux pump TtgABC. Without the efflux pump,
these compounds may interfere with cell ion homeostasis with adverse effects on
cell metabolism, including siderophore production. Finally, our results suggest
that TtgABC is involved in resistance to bile salts and deoxycholate.

Copyright © 2020 Henríquez, Stein and Jung.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01974 
PMCID: PMC7461776
PMID: 32973714 

