
1. Microbiome. 2020 Feb 24;8(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s40168-020-00800-5.

Entomopathogenic nematode-associated microbiota: from monoxenic paradigm to
pathobiome.

Ogier JC(1), Pagès S(1), Frayssinet M(1), Gaudriault S(2).

Author information: 
(1)DGIMI, INRAe-Université de Montpellier, 34095, Montpellier, France.
(2)DGIMI, INRAe-Université de Montpellier, 34095, Montpellier, France.
sophie.gaudriault@umontpellier.fr.

BACKGROUND: The holistic view of bacterial symbiosis, incorporating both host and
microbial environment, constitutes a major conceptual shift in studies
deciphering host-microbe interactions. Interactions between Steinernema
entomopathogenic nematodes and their bacterial symbionts, Xenorhabdus, have long 
been considered monoxenic two partner associations responsible for the killing of
the insects and therefore widely used in insect pest biocontrol. We investigated 
this "monoxenic paradigm" by profiling the microbiota of infective juveniles
(IJs), the soil-dwelling form responsible for transmitting
Steinernema-Xenorhabdus between insect hosts in the parasitic lifecycle.
RESULTS: Multigenic metabarcoding (16S and rpoB markers) showed that the
bacterial community associated with laboratory-reared IJs from Steinernema
carpocapsae, S. feltiae, S. glaseri and S. weiseri species consisted of several
Proteobacteria. The association with Xenorhabdus was never monoxenic. We showed
that the laboratory-reared IJs of S. carpocapsae bore a bacterial community
composed of the core symbiont (Xenorhabdus nematophila) together with a
frequently associated microbiota (FAM) consisting of about a dozen of
Proteobacteria (Pseudomonas, Stenotrophomonas, Alcaligenes, Achromobacter,
Pseudochrobactrum, Ochrobactrum, Brevundimonas, Deftia, etc.). We validated this 
set of bacteria by metabarcoding analysis on freshly sampled IJs from natural
conditions. We isolated diverse bacterial taxa, validating the profile of the
Steinernema FAM. We explored the functions of the FAM members potentially
involved in the parasitic lifecycle of Steinernema. Two species, Pseudomonas
protegens and P. chlororaphis, displayed entomopathogenic properties suggestive
of a role in Steinernema virulence and membership of the Steinernema pathobiome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study validates a shift from monoxenic paradigm to pathobiome
view in the case of the Steinernema ecology. The microbial communities of low
complexity associated with EPNs will permit future microbiota manipulation
experiments to decipher overall microbiota functioning in the infectious process 
triggered by EPN in insects and, more generally, in EPN ecology.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-020-00800-5 
PMCID: PMC7041241
PMID: 32093774 

