
1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2020 Sep 28. doi: 10.1007/s00253-020-10913-4. [Epub
ahead of print]

Metabolic reconstruction of Pseudomonas chlororaphis ATCC 9446 to understand its 
metabolic potential as a phenazine-1-carboxamide-producing strain.

Moreno-Avitia F(1), Utrilla J(2), Bolívar F(1), Nogales J(3), Escalante A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ingeniería Celular y Biocatálisis, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(2)Programa de Biología de Sistemas y Biología Sintética, Centro de Ciencias
Genómicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(3)Departamento de Biotecnología de Sistemas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología,
CSIC, Madrid, España.
(4)Departamento de Ingeniería Celular y Biocatálisis, Instituto de Biotecnología,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
adelfo@ibt.unam.mx.

Pseudomonas chlororaphis is a plant-associated bacterium with reported
antagonistic activity against different organisms and plant growth-promoting
properties. P. chlororaphis possesses exciting biotechnological features shared
with another Pseudomonas with a nonpathogenic phenotype. Part of the antagonistic
role of P. chlororaphis is due to its production of a wide variety of phenazines.
To expand the knowledge of the metabolic traits of this organism, we constructed 
the first experimentally validated genome-scale model of P. chlororaphis ATCC
9446, containing 1267 genes and 2289 reactions, and analyzed strategies to
maximize its potential for the production of phenazine-1-carboxamide (PCN). The
resulting model also describes the capability of P. chlororaphis to carry out the
denitrification process and its ability to consume sucrose (Scr), trehalose,
mannose, and galactose as carbon sources. Additionally, metabolic network
analysis suggested fatty acids as the best carbon source for PCN production.
Moreover, the optimization of PCN production was performed with glucose and
glycerol. The optimal PCN production phenotype requires an increased carbon flux 
in TCA and glutamine synthesis. Our simulations highlight the intrinsic H2O2 flux
associated with PCN production, which may generate cellular stress in an
overproducing strain. These results suggest that an improved antioxidative
strategy could lead to optimal performance of phenazine-producing strains of P.
chlororaphis. KEY POINTS : • This is the first publication of a metabolic model
for a strain of P. chlororaphis. • Genome-scale model is worthy tool to increase 
the knowledge of a non model organism. • Fluxes simulations indicate a possible
effect of H2O2 on phenazines production. • P. chlororaphis can be a suitable
model for a wide variety of compounds.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-020-10913-4 
PMID: 32984920 

