
1. Biochim Biophys Acta Gen Subj. 2020 Sep 30:129756. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129756. [Epub ahead of print]

Structural and molecular dynamic studies of Pseudomonas aeruginosa OdaA reveal
the regulation role of a C-terminal hinge element.

Zhao NL(1), Zhang QQ(2), Zhao C(1), Liu L(3), Li T(1), Li CC(1), He LH(1), Zhu
YB(1), Song YJ(1), Liu HX(4), Bao R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University and Collaborative Innovation Center, Chengdu, China.
(2)School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China.
(3)Department of dermatology, The Affiliated Hospital of Southwest Medical
University, Luzhou, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China. Electronic
address: hxliu@lzu.edu.cn.
(5)Center of Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University and Collaborative Innovation Center, Chengdu, China.
Electronic address: baorui@scu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Crotonase superfamily members exhibit great catalytic diversity
towards various acyl-CoA substrates. A common CoA moiety binding pattern is
usually observed in this family, understanding the substrate-binding mechanism
would facilitate the rational engineering of crotonases for improved properties.
METHODS: We applied X-ray crystallography to investigate a putative enoyl-CoA
hydratase/isomerase OdaA in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Thermal shift assay (TSA)
were performed to explore the binding of OdaA with CoA thioester substrates.
Furthermore, we performed molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to elucidate the
dynamics of its CoA-binding site.
RESULTS: We solved the crystal structures of the apo and CoA-bound OdaA. Thermal 
shift assay (TSA) showed that CoA thioester substrates bind to OdaA with a
different degree. MD simulations demonstrated that the C-terminal alpha helix
underwent a structural transition and a hinge region would associate with this
conformational change.
CONCLUSIONS: TSA in combination with MD simulations elucidate that the dynamics
of C-terminal alpha helix in CoA-binding, and a hinge region play an important
role in conformational change.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Those results help to extend our knowledge about the nature
of crotonases and would be informative for future mechanistic studies and
industry applications.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2020.129756 
PMID: 33010351 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no competing interests.

