
1. Arch Microbiol. 2020 Nov;202(9):2525-2532. doi: 10.1007/s00203-020-01964-2. Epub 
2020 Jul 11.

Comparative study of antimicrobial activity between some medicine plants and
recombinant Lactoferrin peptide against some pathogens of cultivated button
mushroom.

Tanhaeian A(1), Nazifi N(2), Shahriari Ahmadi F(3), Akhlaghi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Plant Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture,
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Ferdowsi University of
Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Biotechnology and Plant Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture,
Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran. shahriari@um.ac.ir.
(4)Department of Plant Protection, Faculty of Agriculture, Ferdowsi University of
Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.

The adverse effects of chemical pesticides on human health and environment cannot
be ignored, hence it seems that novel alternative compounds should be applied to 
control plant pathogens. Among various alternative sources, natural compounds
such as plant essential oils, plant extracts and recombinant antimicrobial
peptides are of significance. The aim of the present study was to investigate
antimicrobial activity of plants essential oils and plant extracts of six
medicinal plants (Lippia citriodora, Ferula gummosa, Bunium persicum, Mentha
piperita, Plantago major and Salvadora persica) along with a chimera peptide of
camel lactoferrin, which is the most important antimicrobial component of camel
milk, against Pseudomonas tolaasii and Trichoderma harzianum as pathogens of
white button mushroom. The antibacterial activity test was conducted under in
vitro conditions through disc diffusion method. The results showed that chimera
camel lactoferrin peptide, with the highest amount of inhibitory zone (14.63 mm
in 20 μg/mL concentration), has a significant difference in antibacterial
activity compared to other treatments. Ferula gummosa conferred no antibacterial 
activity. Also, the results of antifungal effects indicated that plant essential 
oils and extracts have more antifungal activity than recombinant peptide.
Generally, L. citriodora, B. persicum, M. piperita treatments could completely
prevent growth of fungal in in vitro conditions. Therefore, using the mentioned
plants can be a good replacement for reducing the chemical pesticides against
pathogenic agents of button mushroom, without any adverse effects on environment 
and human health.

DOI: 10.1007/s00203-020-01964-2 
PMID: 32653933 

