
1. Iran J Microbiol. 2020 Apr;12(2):138-147.

Aerobic dichlorvos degradation by Pseudomonas stutzeri smk: complete pathway and 
implications for toxicity in Mus musculus.

Parte SG(1), Mohekar AD(2), Kharat AS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, M. J. S. College, Shrigonda, Ahmednagar, India.
(2)Department of Zoology, Maharshi Dnyandeo Mohekar Mahavidyalaya, Kallamb,
Osmanabad, India.
(3)Laboratory of Applied Microbiology, School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru 
University, New Delhi, India.

Background and Objectives: Excess use of pesticides in agricultural field not
only compromised soil fertility but also posed serious threat to water bodies and
life in the surrounding environment. The leftover pesticide residue needs to be
remediated effectively. Compared to physical, chemical and enzymatic remediation 
options the microbial remediation is more practical and sustainable.
Materials and Methods: The Pseudomonas stutzeri smk strain was found to use
dichlorvos as the solitary carbon source. Minimal medium supplemented with
dichlorvos was used to test ability of bacterium to degrade pesticide
aerobically. The metabolites produced by the bacterium were studied with UV-Vis
spectrophotometry, HPLC, FTIR and GC-MS techniques. The toxicity studies of neat 
dichlorvos and P. stutzeri smk degraded metabolites were studied by subcutaneous 
injection in Mus musculus.
Results: The P. stutzeri smk strain was found to degrade as high as 80% of
dichlorvos on 7th day of incubation, at 30 °C temperature and at pH 7. In five
steps complete aerobic degradation of 2,2dicholorvinyl dimethyl phosphate
(dichlorvos) resulted in production of free methyl and phosphate. The degradation
intermediates produced are 2-Chlorovinyl dimethyl phosphate, vinyl dimethyl
phosphate, dimethyl phosphate, methylphosphate and finally free phosphate. The
histopathological analysis of liver, spleen and thymus of M. musculus were
performed to study toxicity of dichlorvos and degraded metabolites.
Conclusion: P. stutzeri smk could result highest aerobic degradation of
dichlorvos to produce free methyl and phosphate. Degradation metabolites could
reverse largely toxic effects of dichlorvos when studied in M. musculus.

Copyright© 2020 Iranian Neuroscience Society.


PMCID: PMC7244824
PMID: 32494348 

