
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Sep 23;202(20). pii: e00146-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00146-20. Print
2020 Sep 23.

Light Response of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 Mediated by Class II LitR, a
Photosensor Homolog.

Sumi S(1), Mutaguchi N(1), Ebuchi T(1), Tsuchida H(1), Yamamoto T(1), Suzuki
M(1), Natsuka C(1), Shiratori-Takano H(1), Shintani M(2), Nojiri H(3)(4), Ueda
K(1), Takano H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Research Center, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Applied Chemistry and Biochemical Engineering Course, Department of
Engineering, Graduate School of Integrated Science and Technology, Shizuoka
University, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Biotechnology Research Center, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Life Science Research Center, College of Bioresource Sciences, Nihon
University, Tokyo, Japan takano.hideaki@nihon-u.ac.jp.

Pseudomonas putida KT2440 retains three homologs (PplR1 to PplR3) of the
LitR/CarH family, an adenosyl B12-dependent light-sensitive MerR family
transcriptional regulator. Transcriptome analysis revealed the existence of a
number of photoinducible genes, including pplR1, phrB (encoding DNA photolyase), 
ufaM (furan-containing fatty acid synthase), folE (GTP cyclohydrolase I), cryB
(cryptochrome-like protein), and multiple genes without annotated/known function.
Transcriptional analysis by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR with knockout 
mutants of pplR1 to pplR3 showed that a triple knockout completely abolished the 
light-inducible transcription in P. putida, which indicates the occurrence of
ternary regulation of PplR proteins. A DNase I footprint assay showed that PplR1 
protein specifically binds to the promoter regions of light-inducible genes,
suggesting a consensus PplR1-binding direct repeat,
5'-T(G/A)TACAN12TGTA(C/T)A-3'. The disruption of B12 biosynthesis cluster did not
affect the light-inducible transcription; however, disruption of ppSB1-LOV (where
LOV indicates "light, oxygen, or voltage") and ppSB2-LOV, encoding blue light
photoreceptors adjacently located to pplR3 and pplR2, respectively, led to the
complete loss of light-inducible transcription. Overall, the results suggest that
the three PplRs and two PpSB-LOVs cooperatively regulate the light-inducible gene
expression. The wide distribution of the pplR/ppSB-LOV cognate pair homologs in
Pseudomonas spp. and related bacteria suggests that the response and adaptation
to light are similarly regulated in the group of nonphototrophic
bacteria.IMPORTANCE The LitR/CarH family is a new group of photosensor homologous
to MerR-type transcriptional regulators. Proteins of this family are distributed 
to various nonphototrophic bacteria and grouped into at least five classes (I to 
V). Pseudomonas putida retaining three class II LitR proteins exhibited a
genome-wide response to light. All three paralogs were functional and mediated
photodependent activation of promoters directing the transcription of
light-induced genes or operons. Two LOV (light, oxygen, or voltage) domain
proteins, adjacently encoded by two litR genes, were also essential for the
photodependent transcriptional control. Despite the difference in light-sensing
mechanisms, the DNA binding consensus of class II LitR [T(G/A)TA(C/T)A] was the
same as that of class I. This is the first study showing the actual involvement
of class II LitR in light-induced transcription.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00146-20 
PMCID: PMC7515241 [Available on 2021-03-23]
PMID: 32967908 

