
1. Environ Microbiol. 2020 Jun 10. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.15127. [Epub ahead of
print]

Cyclic lipopeptide-producing Pseudomonas koreensis group strains dominate the
cocoyam rhizosphere of a Pythium root rot suppressive soil contrasting with P.
putida prominence in conducive soils.

Oni FE(1)(2), Geudens N(3), Onyeka JT(4), Olorunleke OF(1), Salami AE(5), Omoboye
OO(1), Arias AA(6), Adiobo A(7), De Neve S(8), Ongena M(6), Martins JC(3), Höfte 
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Phytopathology Laboratory, Department of Plants and Crops, Faculty of
Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Unit for Environmental Sciences and Management, Faculty of Natural and
Agricultural Sciences, North-West University, Potchefstroom, South Africa.
(3)NMR and Structure Analysis Unit, Department of Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Plant Pathology Unit, National Root Crops Research Institute (NRCRI), Umudike,
Abia, Nigeria.
(5)Department of Crop, Horticulture and Landscape Design, Faculty of Agricultural
Sciences, Ekiti State University (EKSU), Ado-Ekiti, Nigeria.
(6)Microbial Processes and Interactions Unit, Faculty of Gembloux Agro-Bio Tech, 
University of Liège, Gembloux, Belgium.
(7)Institute for Agricultural Research for Development (IRAD), Ekona, Cameroon.
(8)Research Group of Soil Fertility and Nutrient Management, Department of
Environment, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Pseudomonas isolates from tropical environments have been underexplored and may
form an untapped reservoir of interesting secondary metabolites. In this study,
we compared Pseudomonas and cyclic lipopeptide (CLP) diversity in the rhizosphere
of a cocoyam root rot disease (CRRD) suppressive soil in Boteva, Cameroon with
those from four conducive soils in Cameroon and Nigeria. Compared with other
soils, Boteva andosols were characterized by high silt, organic matter, nitrogen 
and calcium. Besides, the cocoyam rhizosphere at Boteva was characterized by
strains belonging mainly to the P. koreensis and P. putida (sub)groups, with
representations in the P. fluorescens, P. chlororaphis, P. jessenii and P.
asplenii (sub)groups. In contrast, P. putida isolates were prominent in conducive
soils. Regarding CLP diversity, Boteva was characterized by strains producing 11 
different CLP types with cocoyamide A producers, belonging to the P. koreensis
group, being the most abundant. However, putisolvin III-V producers were the most
dominant in the rhizosphere of conducive soils in both Cameroon and Nigeria.
Furthermore, we elucidated the chemical structure of putisolvin
derivatives-putisolvin III-V, and described its biosynthetic gene cluster. We
show that high Pseudomonas and metabolic diversity may be driven by microbial
competition, which likely contributes to soil suppressiveness to CRRD.

© 2020 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.15127 
PMID: 32524747 

