
1. Mol Biol Rep. 2020 Oct 4. doi: 10.1007/s11033-020-05872-y. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional characterization of asnC family transcriptional regulator in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa PGPR2 during root colonization.

Sivakumar R(1), Gunasekaran P(2), Rajendhran J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai, 625 021, India.
(2)VIT Bhopal University, Sahore, India.
(3)Department of Genetics, School of Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj
University, Madurai, 625 021, India. jrajendhran@gmail.com.

Transcriptional regulators in bacteria are the crucial players in mediating
communication between environmental cues and DNA transcription through a complex 
network process. Pseudomonas aeruginosa PGPR2 is an efficient root colonizer and 
a biocontrol strain. Previously, we identified that the transcriptional
regulator, asnC, negatively regulates the corn root colonization of P. aeruginosa
PGPR2. In a transposon insertion sequencing (INSeq) screen, the asnC insertion
mutant was positively selected during root colonization, meaning the disruption
of asnC improves the fitness of the P. aeruginosa PGPR2 strain for the root
colonization. In this study, we constructed isogenic mutant of asnC family
transcriptional regulator encoded by PGPR2_17510 by allele exchange mutagenesis. 
The ΔasnC mutant was able to efficiently colonize corn roots with a twofold
increase in population when compared to the wild-type strain. Similarly, the
mutant strain outcompeted the wild-type strain in a competition assay, where the 
mutant strain represented 90% of the total population recovered from the root. We
compared the whole transcriptome of the wild-type and the ΔasnC mutant of P.
aeruginosa PGPR2 when exposed to the corn root exudates. The RNA-Seq revealed
that a total of 360 genes were differentially expressed in the ΔasnC strain of P.
aeruginosa PGPR2. Inactivation of asnC transcriptional regulator resulted in the 
up-regulation of several genetic factors implicated in metabolism, uptake of
nutrients, motility, stress response, and signal transduction, which could play
crucial roles in root colonization. This notion was further validated by
phenotypic characterization and quantification of transcription pattern of
selected genes associated with metabolism, motility, and carbon catabolite
repression between wild type and mutant strain, which was in agreement with
transcriptome data. Similarly, ΔasnC strain formed increased biofilm on abiotic
surface validating our RNA-seq analysis, where transcript levels of several genes
associated with biofilm formation were up-regulated in the mutant strain. We
report that the inactivation of an asnC family transcriptional regulator encoded 
by PGPR2_17510 enhances the root colonization and biofilm-forming ability of P.
aeruginosa PGPR2. Together, our results provide evidence for the molecular
adaptations that enable ΔasnC mutant strain to colonize on the corn roots and to 
form a biofilm.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-020-05872-y 
PMID: 33011891 

