
1. Plant Biotechnol J. 2020 Jul 10. doi: 10.1111/pbi.13447. [Epub ahead of print]

A microalgal-based preparation with synergistic cellulolytic and detoxifying
action towards chemical-treated lignocellulose.

Benedetti M(1), Barera S(1), Longoni P(2), Guardini Z(1), Herrero Garcia N(1),
Bolzonella D(1), Lopez-Arredondo D(3)(4), Herrera-Estrella L(5)(4),
Goldschmidt-Clermont M(6), Bassi R(1), Dall'Osto L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Università di Verona, Verona, Italy.
(2)Faculty of Science, Institute of Biology, University of Neuchâtel, Neuchâtel, 
Switzerland.
(3)StelaGenomics Mexico, S de RL de CV, Irapuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(4)Institute of Genomics for Crop Abiotic Stress Tolerance, Texas Tech
University, Lubbock, TX, USA.
(5)Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la Biodiversidad, Centro de
Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politécnico Nacional,
Irapuato, Guanajuato, Mexico.
(6)Department of Botany and Plant Biology, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland.

High-temperature bioconversion of lignocellulose into fermentable sugars has
drawn attention for efficient production of renewable chemicals and biofuels,
because competing microbial activities are inhibited at elevated temperatures and
thermostable cell wall degrading enzymes are superior to mesophilic enzymes.
Here, we report on the development of a platform to produce four different
thermostable cell wall degrading enzymes in the chloroplast of Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii. The enzyme blend was composed of the cellobiohydrolase CBM3GH5 from 
C. saccharolyticus, the β-glucosidase celB from P. furiosus, the endoglucanase B 
and the endoxylanase XynA from T. neapolitana. In addition, transplastomic
microalgae were engineered for the expression of phosphite dehydrogenase D from
Pseudomonas stutzeri, allowing for growth in non-axenic media by selective
phosphite nutrition. The cellulolytic blend composed of the glycoside hydrolase
(GH) domain GH12/GH5/GH1 allowed the conversion of alkaline-treated
lignocellulose into glucose with efficiencies ranging from 14% to 17% upon 48h of
reaction and an enzyme loading of 0.05% (w/w). Hydrolysates from treated
cellulosic materials with extracts of transgenic microalgae boosted both the
biogas production by methanogenic bacteria and the mixotrophic growth of the
oleaginous microalga Chlorella vulgaris. Notably, microalgal treatment suppressed
the detrimental effect of inhibitory by-products released from the alkaline
treatment of biomass, thus allowing for efficient assimilation of
lignocellulose-derived sugars by C. vulgaris under mixotrophic growth.

© 2020 The Authors. Plant Biotechnology Journal published by Society for
Experimental Biology and The Association of Applied Biologists and John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pbi.13447 
PMID: 32649019 

