
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 May 5;86(10). pii: e02939-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02939-19. Print 2020 May 5.

Diversity and Genetic Basis for Carbapenem Resistance in a Coastal Marine
Environment.

Dewi DAPR(1)(2), Götz B(3), Thomas T(4)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Marine Science and Innovation, School of Biological, Earth and
Environmental Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Udayana University, Denpasar, Bali,
Indonesia.
(3)Institute of Animal Science, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn,
Bonn, Germany.
(4)Centre for Marine Science and Innovation, School of Biological, Earth and
Environmental Sciences, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia t.thomas@unsw.edu.au.
(5)School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Science, The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Resistance to the "last-resort" antibiotics, such as carbapenems, has led to very
few antibiotics being left to treat infections by multidrug-resistant bacteria.
Spread of carbapenem resistance (CR) has been well characterized for the clinical
environment. However, there is a lack of information about its environmental
distribution. Our study reveals that CR is present in a wide range of
Gram-negative bacteria in the coastal seawater environment, including four phyla,
eight classes, and 30 genera. These bacteria were likely introduced into seawater
via stormwater flows. Some CR isolates found here, such as Acinetobacter junii,
Acinetobacter johnsonii, Brevundimonas vesicularis, Enterococcus durans,
Pseudomonas monteilii, Pseudomonas fulva, and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, are
further relevant to human health. We also describe a novel metallo-β-lactamase
(MBL) for marine Rheinheimera isolates with CR, which has likely been
horizontally transferred to Citrobacter freundii or Enterobacter cloacae In
contrast, another MBL of the New Delhi type was likely acquired by environmental 
Variovorax isolates from Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, or
Acinetobacter baumannii utilizing a plasmid. Our findings add to the growing body
of evidence that the aquatic environment is both a reservoir and a vector for
novel CR genes.IMPORTANCE Resistance against the "last-resort" antibiotics of the
carbapenem family is often based on the production of carbapenemases, and this
has been frequently observed in clinical samples. However, the dissemination of
carbapenem resistance (CR) in the environment has been less well explored. Our
study shows that CR is commonly found in a range of bacterial taxa in the coastal
aquatic environment and can involve the exchange of novel metallo-β-lactamases
from typical environmental bacteria to potential human pathogens or vice versa.
The outcomes of this study contribute to a better understanding of how aquatic
and marine bacteria can act as reservoirs and vectors for CR outside the clinical
setting.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02939-19 
PMCID: PMC7205498 [Available on 2020-11-05]
PMID: 32198174 

