
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 28;11:1735. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01735. eCollection 
2020.

Great Tit (Parus major) Uropygial Gland Microbiomes and Their Potential Defensive
Roles.

Bodawatta KH(1), Schierbech SK(1)(2), Petersen NR(1)(2), Sam K(3)(4), Bos N(2),
Jønsson KA(1), Poulsen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
(2)Section for Ecology and Evolution, Department of Biology, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Biology Centre of Czech Academy of Sciences, Institute of Entomology, České
Budějovice, Czechia.
(4)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, České Budějovice, Czechia.

The uropygial gland (preen gland) of birds plays an important role in maintaining
feather integrity and hygiene. Although a few studies have demonstrated potential
defensive roles of bacteria residing within these glands, the diversity and
functions of the uropygial gland microbiota are largely unknown. Therefore, we
investigated the microbiota of great tit (Parus major) uropygial glands through
both isolation of bacteria (culture-dependent) and 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing
(culture-independent). Co-culture experiments of selected bacterial isolates with
four known feather-degrading bacteria (Bacillus licheniformis, Kocuria
rhizophila, Pseudomonas monteilii, and Dermacoccus nishinomiyaensis), two
non-feather degrading feather bacteria, one common soil bacterial pathogen and
two common fungal pathogens enabled us to evaluate the potential antimicrobial
properties of these isolates. Our results show major differences between
bacterial communities characterized using culture-dependent and -independent
approaches. In the former, we were only able to isolate 12 bacterial genera
(dominated by members of the Firmicutes and Actinobacteria), while amplicon
sequencing identified 110 bacterial genera (dominated by Firmicutes,
Bacteroidetes, and Proteobacteria). Uropygial gland bacterial isolates belonging 
to the genera Bacillus and Kocuria were able to suppress the growth of four of
the nine tested antagonists, attesting to potential defensive roles. However,
these bacterial genera were infrequent in our MiSeq results suggesting that the
isolated bacteria may not be obligate gland symbionts. Furthermore, bacterial
functional predictions using 16S rRNA sequences also revealed the ability of
uropygial gland bacteria to produce secondary metabolites with antimicrobial
properties, such as terpenes. Our findings support that uropygial gland bacteria 
may play a role in feather health and that bacterial symbionts might act as
defensive microbes. Future investigations of these bacterial communities, with
targeted approaches (e.g., bacterial isolation and chemical analyses), are thus
warranted to improve our understanding of the evolution and function of these
host-microbe interactions.

Copyright © 2020 Bodawatta, Schierbech, Petersen, Sam, Bos, Jønsson and Poulsen.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01735 
PMCID: PMC7401573
PMID: 32849371 

