
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Mar 30;100(5):2305-2312. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10273. Epub
2020 Feb 6.

Combination of rosemary extract and buffered vinegar inhibits Pseudomonas and
Shewanella growth in common carp (Cyprinus carpio).

Sterniša M(1), Purgatorio C(1), Paparella A(2), Mraz J(3), Smole Možina S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnical Faculty, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of
Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Faculty of Bioscience and Technology for Food, Agriculture and Environment,
University of Teramo, Teramo, Italy.
(3)Faculty of Fisheries and Protection of Waters, South Bohemian Research Center 
of Aquaculture and Biodiversity of Hydrocenoses, Institute of Aquaculture and
Protection of Waters, University of South Bohemia in Česke Budějovice, Česke
Budějovice, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: Aquaculture is the fastest growing food-production sector, and common
carp (Cyprinus carpio) is one of the most cultivated fish species in the world.
Due to its intrinsic characteristics, fish meat is highly susceptible to
microbiological spoilage. Pseudomonas and Shewanella are the primary and
secondary occurring microbiota during storage of fish meat, with significant
contribution to spoilage with the formation of hydrolytic enzymes (lipases and
proteases).
RESULTS: With in vitro testing, we show that rosemary extract (Inolens4),
buffered vinegar and their combination (SyneROX) exhibit antimicrobial effects
against P. fragi, P. psychrophila, S. putrefaciens and S. xiaemensis at
concentrations of 3.13 and 1.56 mg mL-1 . The combination was the most effective 
in inhibiting growth of selected bacteria in food model, and production of
lipases and proteases during 9 days at 5 °C. In situ testing of antimicrobial dip
treatment of carp meat determined that aerobic mesophilic, total psychrotrophic, 
Pseudomonas and hydrogen sulfide producer counts were reduced in all treatments, 
with the most prominent influence being shown by the combination and buffered
vinegar.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the importance of a multilevel assessment of
the antimicrobial potential of biopreservatives under conditions comparable to
those of the selected food. Investigation with bacteria and food model provided
coherent and consistent data for the evaluation of the antimicrobial potential
for carp meat. Combination of buffered vinegar (as active antimicrobial) and
rosemary extract, with well-known and researched antioxidant properties but low
in situ antimicrobial activity, represents a good potential for combined effect
in preservation of fish meat. © 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10273 
PMID: 31960971 

