
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Mar 2;86(6). pii: e02608-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02608-19. Print 2020 Mar 2.

Microbial Community Distribution and Core Microbiome in Successive Wound Grades
of Individuals with Diabetic Foot Ulcers.

Jnana A(1), Muthuraman V(1), Varghese VK(2), Chakrabarty S(2), Murali TS(1),
Ramachandra L(3), Shenoy KR(3), Rodrigues GS(3), Prasad SS(3), Dendukuri D(4),
Morschhauser A(5), Nestler J(6), Peter H(7), Bier FF(7), Satyamoorthy K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Manipal School of Life Sciences, Manipal Academy 
of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life Sciences,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Surgery, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher
Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(4)Achira Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
(5)Fraunhofer Institute for Electronic Nano Systems, Chemnitz, Germany.
(6)BiFlow Systems GmbH, Chemnitz, Germany.
(7)Fraunhofer Institute for Cell Therapy and Immunology, Branch Bioanalytics and 
Bioprocesses IZI-BB, Potsdam, Germany.
(8)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Manipal School of Life Sciences,
Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India
ksatyamoorthy@manipal.edu.

Diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) is a major complication of diabetes with high morbidity
and mortality rates. The pathogenesis of DFUs is governed by a complex milieu of 
environmental and host factors. The empirical treatment is initially based on
wound severity since culturing and profiling the antibiotic sensitivity of
wound-associated microbes is time-consuming. Hence, a thorough and rapid analysis
of the microbial landscape is a major requirement toward devising evidence-based 
interventions. Toward this, 122 wound (100 diabetic and 22 nondiabetic) samples
were sampled for their bacterial community structure using both culture-based and
next-generation 16S rRNA-based metagenomics approach. Both the approaches showed 
that the Gram-negative microbes were more abundant in the wound microbiome. The
core microbiome consisted of bacterial genera, including Alcaligenes,
Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, and Corynebacterium in decreasing order of average
relative abundance. Despite the heterogenous nature and extensive sharing of
microbes, an inherent community structure was apparent, as revealed by a cluster 
analysis based on Euclidean distances. Facultative anaerobes (26.5%) were
predominant in Wagner grade 5, while strict anaerobes were abundant in Wagner
grade 1 (26%). A nonmetric dimensional scaling analysis could not clearly
discriminate samples based on HbA1c levels. Sequencing approach revealed the
presence of major culturable species even in samples with no bacterial growth in 
culture-based approach. Our study indicates that (i) the composition of core
microbial community varies with wound severity, (ii) polymicrobial species
distribution is individual specific, and (iii) antibiotic susceptibility varies
with individuals. Our study suggests the need to evolve better-personalized care 
for better wound management therapies.IMPORTANCE Chronic nonhealing diabetic foot
ulcers (DFUs) are a serious complication of diabetes and are further exacerbated 
by bacterial colonization. The microbial burden in the wound of each individual
displays diverse morphological and physiological characteristics with unique
patterns of host-pathogen interactions, antibiotic resistance, and virulence.
Treatment involves empirical decisions until definitive results on the causative 
wound pathogens and their antibiotic susceptibility profiles are available.
Hence, there is a need for rapid and accurate detection of these polymicrobial
communities for effective wound management. Deciphering microbial communities
will aid clinicians to tailor their treatment specifically to the microbes
prevalent in the DFU at the time of assessment. This may reduce DFUs associated
morbidity and mortality while impeding the rise of multidrug-resistant microbes.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02608-19 
PMCID: PMC7054093
PMID: 31924616 

