
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Sep 4. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000955. [Epub ahead of
print]

nosX is essential for whole-cell N2O reduction in Paracoccus denitrificans but
not for assembly of copper centres of nitrous oxide reductase.

Bennett SP(1), Torres MJ(2), Soriano-Laguna MJ(2), Richardson DJ(2), Gates AJ(2),
Le Brun NE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, School of Chemistry,
University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.
(2)Centre for Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, School of Biological
Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK.

Nitrous oxide (N2O) is a potent greenhouse gas that is produced naturally as an
intermediate during the process of denitrification carried out by some soil
bacteria. It is consumed by nitrous oxide reductase (N2OR), the terminal enzyme
of the denitrification pathway, which catalyses a reduction reaction to generate 
dinitrogen. N2OR contains two important copper cofactors (CuA and CuZ centres)
that are essential for activity, and in copper-limited environments, N2OR fails
to function, contributing to rising levels of atmospheric N2O and a major
environmental challenge. Here we report studies of nosX, one of eight genes in
the nos cluster of the soil dwelling α-proteobaterium Paraccocus denitrificans. A
P. denitrificans ΔnosX deletion mutant failed to reduce N2O under both
copper-sufficient and copper-limited conditions, demonstrating that NosX plays an
essential role in N2OR activity. N2OR isolated from nosX-deficient cells was
found to be unaffected in terms of the assembly of its copper cofactors, and to
be active in in vitro assays, indicating that NosX is not required for the
maturation of the enzyme; in particular, it plays no part in the assembly of
either of the CuA and CuZ centres. Furthermore, quantitative Reverse
Transcription PCR (qRT-PCR) studies showed that NosX does not significantly
affect the expression of the N2OR-encoding nosZ gene. NosX is a homologue of the 
FAD-binding protein ApbE from Pseudomonas stutzeri, which functions in the
flavinylation of another N2OR accessory protein, NosR. Thus, it is likely that
NosX is a system-specific maturation factor of NosR, and so is indirectly
involved in maintaining the reaction cycle of N2OR and cellular N2O reduction.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000955 
PMID: 32886603 

