
1. Gram Negative Bacteria.

Oliveira J(1), Reygaert WC(2).
In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2020-.
2020 Jul 14.

Author information: 
(1)Fundação Universidade do Estado de Mato Grosso
(2)Oakland Un William Beaumont Sch of Med

Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) are among the most significant public health
problems in the world due to the high resistance to antibiotics. These
microorganisms have great clinical importance in hospitals because they put
patients in the intensive care unit (ICU) at high risk and lead to high morbidity
and mortality.[1][2] Two large groups, Enterobacteriaceae and the non-fermenters,
are responsible for most clinical isolates; nevertheless, other clinically
concerning gram-negative organisms exist, including Neisseria, Haemophilus spp., 
Helicobacter pylori, and Chlamydia trachomatis.  Antibiotic Resistance These
organisms have a range of mechanisms to prevent the action of many antimicrobials
used in clinical medicine. Some of the mechanisms of resistance include efflux
pumps,[3] alteration of the drug binding site and membrane
permeability,[4] degradation enzymes, and the conformational change of the drug
culminating in its inactivation.[5] GNB have two membranes, an external and an
internal. The external membrane expresses a potent immune response inducer,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which it is composed of three units: a hydrophilic
polysaccharide, O antigen, and a hydrophobic domain known as lipid A. Lipid A is 
responsible for the higher endotoxic activity of these bacteria.[6][7] However,
the LPS is heterogeneous in the various bacterial groups, and some bacteria
manifest this antigen weakly due to genetic changes and are not recognized by
Toll-like receptors. In contrast, there are BGN groups that can trigger such a
response in large proportions. Thus, LPS can trigger the innate immune response
through Toll-like receptors 4 (TLR4), which occurs in many immune cells such as
monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and neutrophils. The resulting
activation of the innate immune response mediated by LPS together with TLR4
receptors culminates in an exacerbated response with the production of cytokines,
chemokines, and interferons and its suppression. The response of the immune
system depends on both the severity of the infectious process and the structure
of the LPS in the aggressive bacteria, which imbricates to the virulence of the
BGN and, as a consequence, while some bacteria like Escherichia coli potential
induce the immune system, other bacteria like Helicobacter pylori are weakly
antigenic.[8] Enterobacteriaceae  Enterobacteriaceae are a heterogeneous group
widely dispersed in nature. They account for about 80% of gram-negative isolates 
with a myriad of disease-causing general/species in humans, including urinary
tract infections, pneumonia, diarrhea, meningitis, sepsis, endotoxic shock, and
many others. The general/species that frequently affect humans
are Escherichia, Proteus, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Citrobacter, Yersinia,
Shigella, and Salmonella among others. The laboratory characterization is an
essential component when it comes to microorganisms; therefore, it is imperative 
to expose characteristics of Enterobacteriaceae, which are bacilli,
non-sporulated, have variable motility, grow in the presence and absence of
oxygen, ferment organisms of glucose, are cytochrome oxidase negative, and have
the ability to reduce nitrate to nitrite.[9] Antimicrobial Resistance These
organisms diffuse their plasmids by conjugation, which gives rise to resistance
to almost all existing antibiotics. The family of enzymes carbapenemase – KPC,
NDM-1, IMP, VIM, OXA-48 – is undoubtedly one of the most significant health
challenges of the century, given the potential for dissemination between species 
and mortality rates due to infections caused by bacteria with such
plasmids.[10] Colistin, one of the few antibiotics that still treat
multiresistant infections, already has a mobile resistance gene, mcr-1, and
Enterobacteriaceae has a crucial role in the spread of this gene,
with worldwide reports.[11] Moreover, a further concern is that they usually
associate these genes with other resistance genes (CTX-M, NDM, IMP), producing
resistance to cephalosporins and carbapenems, enhancing the deleterious effects
caused by these microorganisms.[6] Non-Fermenters The non-fermenter,
gram-negative bacilli (BNF) have a lower frequency of isolation when compared to 
Enterobacteriaceae; however, they are a relevant group since they cause severe,
fatal infections, especially in the hospital environment. They also cause
opportunistic diseases in ICU patients who undergo invasive procedures. The main 
BNF microorganisms that cause disease in humans are Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Acinetobacter baumannii, Burkholderia cepacia, Stenotrophomonas., Alcaligenes,
Moraxella. These stand out for being aerobic, non-sporulated, they are incapable 
of fermenting sugars, using them through the oxidative route.[12] The critical
issue regarding BNF, when it comes to the antimicrobial sensitivity profile, is
undoubtedly their intrinsic resistance since they produce a variety of genes with
multiple mechanisms capable of mitigating the microbicidal action. Thus, it
stands out in P. aeruginosa, cephalosporinase of type AmpC, and efflux systems
that confer resistance to b-lactams. The most frequent are MexAB-OprM[13]; and
loss of OprD (which gives impermeability to the bacterial cell, due to the loss
of porin)[14]. A. baumannii naturally produces AmpC cephalosporinase and also
oxacillinase (OXA), leaving it spontaneously immune to many drugs. The genetic
ingenuity of this microorganism goes further, and it combines high impermeability
with genetic plasticity, combining with the resistance of mechanisms such as
extended-spectrum b-lactamases (ESBL).[15] The Stenotrophomonas exhibit a pattern
of intrinsic multi-resistance, especially in patients who have had contact with
carbapenems. Thus, Stenotrophomonas present several efflux pumps and produces two
carbapenemases – L1 (resistance to all carbapenems) and L2 
(cephalosporinase),[16] in synthesis. These mechanisms, associated or separate,
restrict the treatment options to an alarming level. Although it is sensitive to 
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim and has an increased resistance mediated by
plasmids.[17]

PMID: 30855801 

