
1. mSphere. 2020 Jul 15;5(4). pii: e00507-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00507-20.

Multiple Plasmid Vectors Mediate the Spread of fosA3 in
Extended-Spectrum-β-Lactamase-Producing Enterobacterales Isolates from Retail
Vegetables in China.

Lv L(#)(1)(2), Huang X(#)(1), Wang J(3), Huang Y(1), Gao X(1), Liu Y(1), Zhou
Q(1), Zhang Q(1), Yang J(1)(2), Guo JY(1), Liu JH(4)(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, National Risk Assessment Laboratory for
Antimicrobial Resistant of Microorganisms in Animals, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development and Safety Evaluation, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Biological Hazard Factors (Animal 
Origin) for Agrifood Safety and Quality, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, National Risk Assessment Laboratory for
Antimicrobial Resistant of Microorganisms in Animals, Guangdong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmaceutics Development and Safety Evaluation, South
China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, China jhliu@scau.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The plasmid-mediated fosfomycin resistance gene fosA3 has been detected in
Enterobacterales from various sources but has rarely been reported in vegetables.
In this study, the aim was to investigate the prevalence of and, subsequently, to
characterize fosA3-positive Enterobacterales isolates from retail vegetables.
Seventeen (7.3%) fosA3-carrying strains were identified from 233
extended-spectrum-β-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales isolates from
vegetables. All 17 isolates, including six Escherichia coli, seven Klebsiella
pneumoniae, two Raoultella ornithinolytica, and two Citrobacter freundii
isolates, carried bla CTX-M S1-nuclease pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
(S1-PFGE) and hybridization confirmed that the fosA3 genes in 16 isolates were
located on plasmids ranging in size from ∼40 kb to ∼250 kb, except one located on
chromosome of C. freundii All the fosA3-carrying plasmids from 16 fosA3-positive 
isolates were successfully transferred into the recipient bacteria by
transformation or conjugation. In agreement with data determined with isolates
from food animals, the IncHI2/ST3 and IncN-F33:A-:B-/F33:A-:B plasmids were the
main vectors of fosA3 in E. coli Additionally, F24:A-:B1, IncFIIK-IncR, IncFIIS, 
IncR, and two untypeable plasmids were found for the first time to be vectors for
fosA3 in Enterobacterales The genetic contexts of fosA3 in 15 Enterobacterales
isolates differed due to insertion and/or loss of molecular modules mediated by
mobile elements. However, all fosA3 genes were flanked by IS26, as commonly
observed in other fosA3-carrying plasmids. Here, we report a high rate of
detection of fosA3 genes, mediated by multiple plasmid vectors, in ESBL-producing
Enterobacterales from retail vegetables. FosA3-producing Enterobacterales could
be transmitted to the human body by direct contact or consumption of vegetables, 
which might pose a potential threat to public health.IMPORTANCE This report
provides important information on the transmission and epidemiology of fosA3
among Enterobacterales isolates from vegetables. The rate of occurrence of fosA3 
in ESBL-producing Enterobacterales from retail vegetables is high, and fosA3 was 
found to be carried by diverse plasmids. Some novel genetic contexts of fosA3 and
novel fosA3-carrying plasmids, including several plasmid types common in K.
pneumoniae, were identified, increasing the number of known transfer vectors for 
the fosA3 gene and reflecting the complexity of fosA3 transmission in
Enterobacterales The capture of fosA3 by the resident plasmid of K. pneumoniae
will accelerate the spread of fosA3 in K. pneumoniae, one of the most pathogenic 
species in clinical medicine. Considering the clinical importance of fosfomycin, 
and the fact that vegetables are directly consumed, the fosfomycin resistance
genes present a risk of transmission to the human body through the food chain and
thus pose a threat to public health.

Copyright © 2020 Lv et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00507-20 
PMCID: PMC7364219
PMID: 32669475 

