
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18;86(17). pii: e00671-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.00671-20. Print 2020 Aug 18.

The Presence of the Hairy-Root-Disease-Inducing (Ri) Plasmid in Wheat Endophytic 
Rhizobia Explains a Pathogen Reservoir Function of Healthy Resistant Plants.

Kang B(1), Maeshige T(2), Okamoto A(2), Kataoka Y(2), Yamamoto S(2), Rikiishi
K(3), Tani A(3), Sawada H(4), Suzuki K(5)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Biology Program, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Institute of Plant Science and Resources, Okayama University, Kurashiki,
Okayama, Japan.
(4)Genetic Resources Center, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(5)Basic Biology Program, Graduate School of Integrated Sciences for Life,
Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan ksuzuki@hiroshima-u.ac.jp.

A large number of strains in the Rhizobium radiobacter species complex (biovar 1 
Agrobacterium) have been known as causative pathogens for crown gall and hairy
root diseases. Strains within this complex were also found as endophytes in many 
plant species with no symptoms. The aim of this study was to reveal the endophyte
variation of this complex and how these endophytic strains differ from pathogenic
strains. In this study, we devised a simple but effective screening method by
exploiting the high resolution power of mass spectrometry. We screened endophyte 
isolates from young wheat and barley plants, which are resistant to the diseases,
and identified seven isolates from wheat as members of the R. radiobacter species
complex. Through further analyses, we assigned five strains to the genomovar
(genomic group) G1 and two strains to G7 in R. radiobacter Notably, these two
genomovar groups harbor many known pathogenic strains. In fact, the two G7
endophyte strains showed pathogenicity on tobacco, as well as the virulence
prerequisites, including a 200-kbp Ri plasmid. All five G1 strains possessed a
500-kbp plasmid, which is present in well-known crown gall pathogens. These data 
strongly suggest that healthy wheat plants are reservoirs for pathogenic strains 
of R. radiobacter IMPORTANCE Crown gall and hairy root diseases exhibit very wide
host-plant ranges that cover gymnosperm and dicot plants. The Rhizobium
radiobacter species complex harbors causative agents of the two diseases.
Recently, endophyte isolates from many plant species have been assigned to this
species complex. We isolated seven endophyte strains belonging to the species
complex from wheat plants and revealed their genomovar affiliations and plasmid
profile. The significance of this study is the finding of the genomovar
correlation between the endophytes and the known pathogens, the presence of a
virulence ability in two of the seven endophyte strains, and the high ratio of
the pathogenic strains in the endophyte strains. This study therefore provides
convincing evidence that could unravel the mechanism that maintains pathogenic
agents of this species and sporadically delivers them to susceptible plants.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00671-20 
PMCID: PMC7440801 [Available on 2021-02-18]
PMID: 32631868 

