
1. Mikrobiyol Bul. 2020 Apr;54(2):235-245. doi: 10.5578/mb.69286.

[The Microbiological Analysis of a Rhizobium radiobacter Outbreak After
Intravitreal Injection].

[Article in Turkish]

Parlak M(1), Batur M(2), Ölmez S(3), Güdücüoğlu H(1), Otlu B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Van Yuzuncu Yil University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Microbiology, Van, Turkey.
(2)Van Yuzuncu Yil University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology,
Van, Turkey.
(3)Yuksekova State Hospital, Microbiology Laboratory, Hakkari, Turkey.
(4)Inonu University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,
Malatya, Turkey.

Rhizobium radiobacter, which is found in nature and causes tumorigenic plant
diseases can lead to opportunistic infections, especially in people with
underlying diseases. In our study, endophthalmitis that observed in ten patients 
caused by R.radiobacter bacteria after intravitreal ranibizumab injection in
Ophthalmology Clinic were examined microbiologically. Vitreous fluid samples of
13 patients who received intravitreal ranibizumab injection were sent to the
Microbiology Laboratory from Van Yuzuncu Yil University Faculty of Medicine's
Ophthalmology Clinic for microbiological examination in December 21, 2016.
Samples were examined under microscope after staining with Gram and cultured with
5% sheep blood agar and Eosin Methylene Blue (EMB) agar. The culture plates were 
incubated for 18-24 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2. At the end of this period, catalase,
oxidase, and urease tests were performed on the colonies. The identification and 
antibiotic susceptibility tests of microorganisms growing in vitreous fluid
samples were performed using BD Phoenix (Becton Dickinson, USA), Vitek 2 Compact 
(BioMerieux, France), and Vitek MS (BioMerieux, France) systems. In addition, 16S
rDNA sequence analysis was performed and the pulsed field gel electrophoresis
(PFGE) method was used to determine the clonal relationship between the isolates.
After growing in cultures (one day after the procedure), culture samples were
collected from the objects, medical tools and equipment, hands of healthcare
staff and a new injection solution in the area where the procedure was performed.
R.radiobacter was isolated in 10 of the vitreous fluid samples of 13 patients,
and no bacterial growth was detected in 3. The microorganisms were found to be
gram-negative bacilli, non-fermenter, motile, catalase/oxidase/urease positive,
in compliance with R.radiobacter. All isolates were identified as R.radiobacter
by BD Phoenix (Becton Dickinson, USA), Vitek 2 Compact (BioMerieux, France), and 
Vitek MS (BioMerieux, France) (database v2.0) systems. R.radiobacter isolates
were found to be resistant to ampicillin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, trimethoprim/ 
sulfamethoxazole, cefotaxime and ceftazidime; susceptible to cefuroxime,
cefepime, amikacin, gentamicin, imipenem, meropenem, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin 
and piperacillin/tazobactam. The isolates were identified as R.radiobacter by 16S
rDNA sequence analysis. PFGE showed that all isolates had the same band profile. 
R.radiobacter isolates with the same band profile likely revealed that the
contamination was from the same source. However, the growth of R.radiobacter was 
not detected in the cultures made from the objects, medical instruments and
supplies, the hands of healthcare professionals and the new injection solution in
the area where the procedure was performed, and the source of the agent could not
be determined. The results have shown that intravitreal injection procedure
carries a risk for R.radiobacter infection. Disinfection and antisepsis
conditions, before and during the procedure, is important for the prevention of
such infections. This study is the first epidemic outbreak report of
endophthalmitis caused by the same strain of R.radiobacter and the second article
in which R.radiobacter was reported as the cause of endophthalmitis after
intravitreal injection.

DOI: 10.5578/mb.69286 
PMID: 32723279  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

