
1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jan;43(1):126046. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2019.126046.
Epub 2019 Nov 29.

History and current taxonomic status of genus Agrobacterium.

Flores-Félix JD(1), Menéndez E(1), Peix A(2), García-Fraile P(1), Velázquez E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología y Genética and Instituto Hispanoluso de
Investigaciones Agrarias (CIALE), Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Recursos Naturales y Agrobiología, IRNASA-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain;
Unidad Asociada Grupo de Interacción Planta-Microorganismo (Universidad de
Salamanca-IRNASA-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología y Genética and Instituto Hispanoluso de
Investigaciones Agrarias (CIALE), Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain;
Unidad Asociada Grupo de Interacción Planta-Microorganismo (Universidad de
Salamanca-IRNASA-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain. Electronic address: evp@usal.es.

The genus Agrobacterium was created a century ago by Conn who included it in the 
family Rhizobiaceae together with the genus Rhizobium. Initially, the genus
Agrobacterium contained the non-pathogenic species Agrobacterium radiobacter and 
the plant pathogenic species Agrobacterium tumefaciens and Agrobacterium
rhizogenes. At the end of the past century two new pathogenic species,
Agrobacterium rubi and Agrobacterium vitis, were added to the genus. Already in
the present century these species plus Agrobacterium larrymoorei were
reclassified into genus Rhizobium. This reclassification was controversial and
for a time both genus names were used when new species were described. Few years 
ago, after a taxonomic revision based on genomic data, the old species A.
rhizogenes was maintained in the genus Rhizobium, the old species A. vitis was
transferred to the genus Allorhizobium and several Rhizobium species were
transferred to the genus Agrobacterium, which currently contains 14 species
including the old species A. radiobacter, A. tumefaciens, A. rubi and A.
larrymoorei. Most of these species are able to produce tumours in different
plants, nevertheless the genus Agrobacterium also encompasses non-pathogenic
species, one species able to nodulate legumes and one human pathogenic species.
Taking into account that the species affiliations to five Agrobacterium
genomospecies have not been determined yet, an increase in the number of species 
within this genus is expected in the near future.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier GmbH.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2019.126046 
PMID: 31818496  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

