
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 Jul 1;75(7):1671-1680. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa104.

Indications for the use of highest priority critically important antimicrobials
in the veterinary sector.

Lhermie G(1)(2), La Ragione RM(3), Weese JS(4), Olsen JE(5), Christensen JP(5),
Guardabassi L(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)IHAP, Université de Toulouse, INRA, ENVT, Toulouse, France.
(3)Department of Pathology and Infectious Diseases, School of Veterinary
Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7AL, UK.
(4)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1870 Frederiksberg C, Denmark.
(6)Department of Pathobiology & Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College,
Hawkhead Lane, North Mymms, Hatfield, Herts AL9 7TA, UK.

BACKGROUND: Among the measures taken to preserve the clinical efficacy of highest
priority critically important antimicrobials (HP-CIAs), the WHO has recommended
avoiding their use in food-producing animals. Little is known regarding the
indications for which different antimicrobial classes are used in animals, even
in countries where data on antimicrobial use are available.
OBJECTIVES: To outline, in a narrative review, the diseases for which HP-CIAs are
used in veterinary medicine, highlighting incongruences with international
guidelines and disease conditions where effective alternatives to HP-CIAs are
missing.
METHODS: Scientific literature, national reports and expert opinion were used to 
describe the indications for the use of HP-CIAs in the main food-producing (pigs,
cattle and poultry) and companion (horses, dogs and cats) animal species.
RESULTS: The most common indications for use of HP-CIAs are enteric and
respiratory infections in pigs, cattle and poultry, urogenital infections in dogs
and cats and respiratory infections in horses. In some instances, no valid and
convenient alternatives to colistin and macrolides are available against certain 
porcine enteric and bovine respiratory pathogens. Effective, legal and convenient
alternatives to HP-CIAs are also lacking for managing common infections in cats, 
for which oral administration is difficult, Rhodococcus equi infections in
horses, some enteric and respiratory infections in poultry and MDR infections in 
all companion animal species.
CONCLUSIONS: Future research and stewardship programmes should focus on the
disease conditions identified by this review to reduce the use of HP-CIAs in the 
veterinary sector.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa104 
PMID: 32240295 

