
1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2020 Aug;91:103114. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103114. Epub 2020 
May 7.

Assessment of Antimicrobial Susceptibility of Virulent Strains of Rhodococcus
equi Isolated From Foals and Soil of Horse Breeding Farms With and Without
Endemic Infections.

Kalinowski M(1), Jarosz Ł(2), Grądzki Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
Electronic address: marcin.kalinowski@up.lublin.pl.
(2)Department of Epizootiology and Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Life Sciences in Lublin, Lublin, Poland.

Rhodococcus equi is an opportunistic, intracellular saprophyte that causes severe
pyogranulomatous pneumonia in foals. The bacterium displays in vitro
susceptibility to many antibiotics. The highest efficacy against R. equi in vitro
and in vivo is achieved by using a combination of rifampicin and macrolide
antibiotics. Recent years have seen an upward trend in the minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC) of rifampicin and erythromycin, suggesting increasing
resistance of R. equi to these antibiotics. The aim of the study was to determine
the antimicrobial activity of 24 selected antibiotics against R. equi strains
isolated from dead foals and from the environment of horse breeding farms with
and without endemic R. equi infections. Minimum inhibitory concentration gradient
strips were used to determine the lowest concentration of the antibiotic that
inhibited the growth of R. equi. Based on normal MIC distribution, an
epidemiologic cutoff values (ECOFF) were assessed for particular antibiotics and 
R. equi strains. The results were compared with ECOFFs for S. aureus, according
to the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing data. The data 
indicate that the lowest MIC values were obtained for clarithromycin, rifampicin,
imipenem, and vancomycin. The majority of R. equi strains can be classified as
wild type in relation to the majority of antibiotics. A small percentage of
strains presented non-WT (NWT) with the exception of SXT, for which 35% of
strains were classified as NWT. The lack of interpretative criteria for R. equi
creates a real problem in the assessment of antibiotic sensitivity both for
clinical and scientific purposes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.103114 
PMID: 32684259 

