
1. Cureus. 2020 Apr 25;12(4):e7829. doi: 10.7759/cureus.7829.

Infective Endocarditis Caused by Rhodococcus equi in an Immunocompetent Patient.

Shah R(1), Klumpp LC(1), Nerella N(2), Liu-Young G(3)(4), Jordan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, Citrus Memorial Hospital, Inverness, USA.
(2)Cardiology, Citrus Memorial Hospital, Inverness, USA.
(3)Infectious Disease, Citrus Memorial Hospital, Inverness, USA.
(4)Infectious Disease, Bayfront Seven Rivers Hospital, Crystal River, USA.

Rhodococcus equi (R. equi) is a rare zoonotic organism that is found in the feces
of grazing animals and in farm soil. It typically causes pulmonary disease, but
it can also cause extrapulmonary disease. Immunocompromised patients are at a
higher risk of developing the infection, but it has been reported in individuals 
with competent immune system as well. We present a unique case of infectious
endocarditis (IE) due to a R. equi infection in an immunocompetent patient. A
77-year-old male with a history of coronary artery disease, prior myocardial
infarction, systolic heart failure, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, aortic
stenosis, and benign prostatic hypertrophy was evaluated by cardiothoracic
surgery for coronary and valvular heart disease. His transesophageal
echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization demonstrated severe aortic stenosis
and multivessel coronary artery disease. The patient underwent coronary artery
bypass grafting and simultaneous aortic valve replacement. Intraoperatively,
there was exudative material covering his aortic valve, which was sent for tissue
culture. Tissue culture was positive for R. equi and Enterococcus faecium.  R.
equi endocarditis is a rare presentation of this organism. R. equi endocarditis
is a very challenging diagnosis due to its varying presentation compared to
typical IE. Detailed history taking and physical exam are extremely important to 
determine if further evaluation is needed. Prolonged oral and intravenous
antibiotics are recommended for effective treatment.

Copyright © 2020, Shah et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.7829 
PMCID: PMC7249752
PMID: 32467804 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

