
1. Equine Vet J. 2020 Sep 28. doi: 10.1111/evj.13355. [Epub ahead of print]

Acute interstitial pneumonia in foals: A severe, multifactorial syndrome with
lung tissue recovery in surviving foals.

Punsmann S(1), Hoppe J(2), Klopfleisch R(2), Venner M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Equine Clinic, School of Veterinary Medicine, Hanover, Germany.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Veterinary Clinic, Destedt, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Acute interstitial pneumonia in foals has been sparsely described in 
literature, and the individual authors disagree on the underlying aetiology.
Histopathological follow-up from surviving foals is not available.
OBJECTIVES: Description of clinical and histopathological findings in the course 
of acute interstitial pneumonia and in recovery. Investigating aetiology and
possible triggering factors of acute interstitial pneumonia.
STUDY DESIGN: Case series.
METHODS: Post-mortem examination of nine affected foals; seven died during the
acute phase, and two had recovered from acute interstitial pneumonia. Data from
clinical examinations on the day of death were recorded for all foals. Complete
necropsy, special histological staining, virological and microbiological
examinations were performed.
RESULTS: Seven foals died during the acute phase with severe respiratory
distress, fever and increased numbers of comet tail artefacts in lung ultrasound.
In post mortem examination a wide variety of possible triggering factors was
identified. Microbiology revealed Escherichia coli, Rhodococcus equi and
Klebsiella pneumoniae as most common bacterial pathogens. Equine herpesvirus 2
was detected in all foals by PCR. Those with high viral loads also displayed
histopathological changes suggestive of viral infections. Pneumocystis carinii
was detected in all acutely affected foals. Histopathological changes in lung
parenchyma clearly differed between the foals that had recovered from acute
interstitial pneumonia and those dying in the acute phase. While lungs in acute
phase featured marked parenchymal collapse and necrosis, the recovered foals
revealed nearly normal ventilated lung parenchyma and alveolar structure.
MAIN LIMITATIONS: Small number of patients. Because all foals are from the same
breeding farm with endemic occurrence of pathogens, it is not certain whether the
results of this study can be transferred to other foals without restrictions.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute interstitial pneumonia seems based on a multifactorial
aetiology. Lungs from foals that have survived acute interstitial pneumonia
appear to be able to regenerate completely, leaving no permanent changes.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/evj.13355 
PMID: 32986272 

