
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2020 Jan 8;27(1):25-40.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2019.11.001.
Epub 2019 Dec 19.

Roseburia spp. Abundance Associates with Alcohol Consumption in Humans and Its
Administration Ameliorates Alcoholic Fatty Liver in Mice.

Seo B(1), Jeon K(2), Moon S(3), Lee K(4), Kim WK(2), Jeong H(2), Cha KH(5), Lim
MY(6), Kang W(7), Kweon MN(8), Sung J(9), Kim W(10), Park JH(11), Ko G(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Graduate School of Public Health,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea; School of Biological Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Graduate School of Public Health,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Graduate School of Public Health,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea; KoBioLabs, Inc., Seoul, Korea.
(4)KoBioLabs, Inc., Seoul, Korea.
(5)Functional Food Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST),
Gangneung, Korea.
(6)Research Group of Healthcare, Korea Food Research Institute, Wanju, Korea.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, Korea.
(8)Mucosal Immunology Laboratory, Department of Convergence Medicine, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine/Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul Metropolitan Government Seoul National University Boramae Medical Center,
Seoul, Korea.
(11)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.
(12)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Graduate School of Public
Health, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea; Bio-MAX/N-Bio, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Korea; Center for Human and Environmental Microbiome,
Institute of Health and Environment, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea;
KoBioLabs, Inc., Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: gko@snu.ac.kr.

Although a link between the gut microbiota and alcohol-related liver diseases
(ALDs) has previously been suggested, the causative effects of specific taxa and 
their functions have not been fully investigated to date. Here, we analyze the
gut microbiota of 410 fecal samples from 212 Korean twins by using the Alcohol
Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) scales to adjust for host genetics.
This analysis revealed a strong association between low AUDIT scores and the
abundance of the butyrate-producing genus Roseburia. When Roseburia spp. are
administered to ALD murine models, both hepatic steatosis and inflammation
significantly improve regardless of bacterial viability. Specifically, the
flagellin of R. intestinalis, possibly through Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5)
recognition, recovers gut barrier integrity through upregulation of the tight
junction protein Occludin and helps to restore the gut microbiota through
elevated expression of IL-22 and REG3γ. Our study demonstrates that Roseburia
spp. improve the gut ecosystem and prevent leaky gut, leading to ameliorated
ALDs.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2019.11.001 
PMID: 31866426  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

