
1. FEBS J. 2020 May;287(10):2105-2117. doi: 10.1111/febs.15117. Epub 2019 Nov 20.

Molecular insight into a new low-affinity xylan binding module from the
xylanolytic gut symbiont Roseburia intestinalis.

Leth ML(1), Ejby M(1), Madland E(2), Kitaoku Y(2), Slotboom DJ(3), Guskov A(3),
Aachmann FL(2), Abou Hachem M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)NOBIPOL, Department of Biotechnology and Food Science, NTNU Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Membrane Enzymology, Institute for Biomolecular Sciences & Biotechnology,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Efficient capture of glycans, the prime metabolic resources in the human gut,
confers a key competitive advantage for gut microbiota members equipped with
extracellular glycoside hydrolases (GHs) to target these substrates. The
association of glycans to the bacterial cell surface is typically mediated by
carbohydrate binding modules (CBMs). Here, we report the structure of RiCBM86
appended to a GH family 10 xylanase from Roseburia intestinalis. This CBM
represents a new family of xylan binding CBMs present in xylanases from abundant 
and prevalent healthy human gut Clostridiales. RiCBM86 adopts a canonical
β-sandwich fold, but shows structural divergence from known CBMs. The structure
of RiCBM86 has been determined with a bound xylohexaose, which revealed an open
and shallow binding site. RiCBM86 recognizes only a single xylosyl ring with
direct hydrogen bonds. This mode of recognition is unprecedented amongst
previously reported xylan binding type-B CBMs that display more extensive
hydrogen-bonding patterns to their ligands or employ Ca2+ to mediate
ligand-binding. The architecture of RiCBM86 is consistent with an atypically low 
binding affinity (KD  about 0.5 mm for xylohexaose) compared to most xylan
binding CBMs. Analyses using NMR spectroscopy corroborated the observations from 
the complex structure and the preference of RiCBM86 to arabinoxylan over
glucuronoxylan, consistent with the largely negatively charged surface flanking
the binding site. Mutational analysis and affinity electrophoresis established
the importance of key binding residues, which are conserved in the family. This
study provides novel insight into the structural features that shape low-affinity
CBMs that mediate extended bacterial glycan capture in the human gut niche.
DATABASES: Structural data are available in the protein data bank database under 
the accession number 6SGF. Sequence data are available in the GenBank database
under the accession number EEV01588.1. The assignment of the
Roseburia intestinalis xylan binding module into the CBM86 new family is
available in the CAZy database (http://www.cazy.org/CBM86.html).

© 2019 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

DOI: 10.1111/febs.15117 
PMID: 31693302 

