
1. Sci Transl Med. 2020 Sep 9;12(560). pii: eaaz8631. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz8631.

Therapeutic responses to Roseomonas mucosa in atopic dermatitis may involve
lipid-mediated TNF-related epithelial repair.

Myles IA(1)(2), Castillo CR(3)(2), Barbian KD(4), Kanakabandi K(4), Virtaneva
K(4), Fitzmeyer E(4), Paneru M(4), Otaizo-Carrasquero F(5), Myers TG(5),
Markowitz TE(6)(7), Moore IN(8), Liu X(9), Ferrer M(9), Sakamachi Y(10),
Garantziotis S(10), Swamydas M(11), Lionakis MS(11), Anderson ED(2), Earland
NJ(2), Ganesan S(12), Sun AA(2), Bergerson JRE(2), Silverman RA(13), Petersen
M(14), Martens CA(4), Datta SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Therapeutics Unit, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. mylesi@niaid.nih.gov.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(3)Epithelial Therapeutics Unit, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)RTS Genomics Unit, Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH, Hamilton, MT, USA.
(5)Genomic Technologies Section, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)NIAID Collaborative Bioinformatics Resource (NCBR), NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(7)Advanced Biomedical Computational Science, Frederick National Laboratory for
Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, USA.
(8)Infectious Disease Pathogenesis Section, Comparative Medicine Branch, NIAID,
NIH, Rockville, MD, USA.
(9)Department of Pre-clinical Innovation, National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, NIH, Rockville, MD, USA.
(10)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle, NC,
USA.
(11)Fungal Pathogenesis Section, LCIM, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(12)Biological Imaging Section, Research Technology Branch, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda,
MD, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Georgetown University Hospital, Washington, DC,
USA.
(14)Walter Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Dysbiosis of the skin microbiota is increasingly implicated as a contributor to
the pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis (AD). We previously reported first-in-human
safety and clinical activity results from topical application of the commensal
skin bacterium Roseomonas mucosa for the treatment of AD in 10 adults and 5
children older than 9 years of age. Here, we examined the potential mechanism of 
action of R. mucosa treatment and its impact on children with AD less than 7
years of age, the most common age group for children with AD. In 15 children with
AD, R. mucosa treatment was associated with amelioration of disease severity,
improvement in epithelial barrier function, reduced Staphylococcus aureus burden 
on the skin, and a reduction in topical steroid requirements without severe
adverse events. Our observed response rates to R. mucosa treatment were greater
than those seen in historical placebo control groups in prior AD studies. Skin
improvements and colonization by R. mucosa persisted for up to 8 months after
cessation of treatment. Analyses of cellular scratch assays and the MC903 mouse
model of AD suggested that production of sphingolipids by R. mucosa, cholinergic 
signaling, and flagellin expression may have contributed to therapeutic impact
through induction of a TNFR2-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. These
results suggest that a randomized, placebo-controlled trial of R. mucosa
treatment in individuals with AD is warranted and implicate commensals in the
maintenance of the skin epithelial barrier.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aaz8631 
PMID: 32908007 

