
1. Clin Pharmacol Transl Med. 2019;3(2):152-159. Epub 2019 Oct 12.

Effects of C-Terminal Domain of the Heavy Chain of Tetanus Toxin on Gut
Microbiota in a Rat Model of Depression.

Getachew B(1), Tizabi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Howard University College of Medicine, Washington,
DC, USA.

Background/Aims: It is now well established that imbalance or dysbiosis in the
gut microbiota (GM) plays a significant role in
neuropsychiatric/neurodegenerative disorders. Recently it has been reported that 
the C-terminal domain of the heavy chain of tetanus toxin (Hc-TeTx) may not only 
act as a neuroprotectant but may also exhibit antidepressant effects in
Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats, a putative animal model of treatment-resistant
depression. The aim of this study was to determine whether Hc-TeTx may also
interact with GM implicated in mood regulation in these rats.
Methods: Adult male WKY rats (5/group) were injected intramuscularly (IM) with 60
μg/kg Hc-TeTx or saline. Twenty-four hours after the injection, the animals were 
sacrificed, intestinal stools were collected and stored at -80°C. DNA was
extracted from the samples for 16S rRNA gene-based microbiota analysis using 16S 
Metagenomics application.
Results: Abundance of several bacteria at different taxonomic levels were
distinguished between Hc-TeTx group and the control. At species-level, 11
operational taxonomic units (OTUs), particularly Bifidobacterium cholerium, a
bacterium with a strong ability to degrade resistant starch, were enriched (69
fold) in the Hc-TeTx group. In addition, 5 species of probiotic Lactobacillus,
two butyrate-forming species Sarcina, Butyrivibro proteovlasticus and Roseburia
faecis, were enhanced by a minimum of 2-fold in Hc-TeTx group. In contrast, 24
species including five species of pathogenic Provettela (5-14 fold), two
mucin-degrading Akkermansia muciniphila and Mucispirillum schaedleri, and four
species of pathogenic Ruminoccus were reduced by a minimum of 2-fold by Hc-TeTx
treatment.
Conclusion: Hc-TeTx enhanced probiotic species and suppressed the opportunistic
pathogens. Since overall effect of Hc-TeTx appears to be promoting GM associated 
with mood enhancement (e.g. Bifidobacterium, Butyrivibro, and Lactobacillus) and 
suppressing GM associated with mood dysregulation (e.g. Mucispirillum,
Provettela, and Ruminoccus) a novel mechanism of beneficial effects of Hc-TeTx
may involve normalization of dysbiosis.


PMCID: PMC7063687
PMID: 32159077 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors state that they 
have no conflict of interest.

