
1. J Infect Chemother. 2020 Aug;26(8):802-806. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2020.03.007. Epub
2020 Apr 5.

A nosocomial cluster of Roseomonas mucosa bacteremia possibly linked to
contaminated hospital environment.

Okamoto K(1), Ayibieke A(2), Saito R(2), Ogura K(3), Magara Y(4), Ueda R(3),
Ogawa H(5), Hatakeyama S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical
Treatment Corporation Okubo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Infectious
Diseases, University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
kokamoto-tky@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical
Treatment Corporation, Okubo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Nursing, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical Treatment
Corporation, Okubo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical
Treatment Corporation Okubo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical
Treatment Corporation Okubo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; Department of General
Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases, Jichi Medical University Hospital,
Tochigi, Japan.

Roseomonas, a genus of pink-pigmented glucose non-fermentative bacteria, has been
associated with various primary and hospital-acquired human infections; however, 
to our knowledge, its nosocomial transmission has never been reported. Clinical
and epidemiological investigations were carried out after two cases of R. mucosa 
bacteremia occurred in our hospital in 2018. Environmental samples were taken of 
environmental surfaces prone to water contamination in the wards and cultured.
The two clinical isolates and all environmental isolates that showed growth of
pink colonies were identified using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization
time of flight mass spectrometry and 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Pulse-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) was performed and fingerprinting software was used to
analyze the DNA restriction patterns and determine their similarity. Two patients
who developed R. mucosa bacteremia had received care from the same treatment
team. Of 126 environmental samples, five showed growth of R. mucosa. Using 80%
similarity as the cut-off, PFGE analysis revealed that the isolates from the two 
patients' blood cultures and three environmental isolates belonged to the same
clone. The hospital water environment was contaminated with the same clone of
R. mucosa that caused bacteremia in the two patients, suggesting nosocomial
transmission linked to contaminated environment. Increased vigilance is needed to
monitor the emergence of Roseomonas in healthcare settings.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2020.03.007 
PMID: 32265107 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest All authors
report no conflicts of interest relevant to this article.

