
1. J Periodontol. 2020 Jun 13. doi: 10.1002/JPER.20-0194. [Epub ahead of print]

Subgingival microbiome and clinical periodontal status in an elderly cohort: The 
WHICAP ancillary study of oral health.

Papapanou PN(1), Park H(2), Cheng B(3), Kokaras A(4), Paster B(4), Burkett S(1), 
Watson CW(5), Annavajhala MK(2), Uhlemann AC(2), Noble JM(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontics, Section of Oral, Diagnostic and Rehabilitation
Sciences, College of Dental Medicine, New York, NY.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Columbia University, 
New York, NY.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, New York, NY.
(4)Forsyth Institute, Cambridge, MA.
(5)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, GH
Sergievsky Center, New York, NY.
(6)Department of Neurology, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York,
NY.

BACKGROUND: There is a sparsity of data describing the periodontal microbiome in 
elderly individuals. We analyzed the association of subgingival bacterial
profiles and clinical periodontal status in a cohort of participants in the
Washington Heights-Inwood Columbia Aging Project (WHICAP).
METHODS: Dentate individuals underwent a full-mouth periodontal examination at
six sites/tooth. Up to four subgingival plaque samples per person, each obtained 
from the mesio-lingual site of the most posterior tooth in each quadrant, were
harvested and pooled. Periodontal status was classified according to the Centers 
for Disease Control/American Academy of Periodontology (CDC/AAP) criteria as well
as based on the percentage of teeth/person with pockets ≥4 mm deep. Bacterial DNA
was isolated and was processed and analyzed using Human Oral Microbe
Identification using Next Generation Sequencing (HOMINGS). Differential abundance
across the periodontal phenotypes was calculated using the R package DESeq2. α-
and β-diversity metrics were calculated using DADA2-based clustering.
RESULTS: The mean age of the 739 participants was 74.5 years, and 32% were male. 
Several taxa including Sneathia amnii-like sp., Peptoniphilaceae [G-1] bacterium 
HMT 113, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fretibacterium fastidiosum, Filifactor alocis,
and Saccharibacteria (TM7) [G-1] bacterium HMT 346 were more abundant with
increasing severity of periodontitis. In contrast, species such as Veillonella
parvula, Veillonella dispar, Rothia dentocariosa, and Lautropia mirabilis were
more abundant in health. Microbial diversity increased in parallel with the
severity and extent of periodontitis.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed subgingival bacterial patterns in these elderly
individuals corroborated corresponding findings in younger cohorts and were
consistent with the concept that periodontitis is associated with perturbations
in the resident microbiome.

© 2020 American Academy of Periodontology.

DOI: 10.1002/JPER.20-0194 
PMID: 32533776 

