
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 24;11:1465. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01465. eCollection 
2020.

In vitro Synergy of Polyphenolic Extracts From Honey, Myrtle and Pomegranate
Against Oral Pathogens, S. mutans and R. dentocariosa.

Sateriale D(1), Facchiano S(1), Colicchio R(2), Pagliuca C(2), Varricchio E(1),
Paolucci M(1), Volpe MG(3), Salvatore P(2)(4), Pagliarulo C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science and Technology, University of Sannio, Benevento, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(3)Institute of Food Science - CNR, Avellino, Italy.
(4)CEINGE, Advanced Biotechnologies s.c.ar.l., Naples, Italy.

The increasing incidence rate of oral diseases, the wide spread of antimicrobial 
resistance, and the adverse effects of conventional antibiotics mean alternative 
prevention and treatment options are needed to counteract oral pathogens. In this
regard, our study aims to evaluate the antibacterial activity of polyphenolic
extracts prepared from acacia honey, myrtle leaves, and pomegranate peel against 
cariogenic bacteria, such as Streptococcus mutans and Rothia dentocariosa. The
chemical-physical parameters of acacia honey and the RP-HPLC polyphenolic profile
of pomegranate peel extract have been previously described in our studies, while 
the characterization of myrtle extract, performed by HPLC analysis, is reported
here. All the extracts were used singly and in binary combinations to highlight
any synergistic effects. Moreover, the extracts were tested in association with
amoxicillin to evaluate their ability to reduce the effective dose of this drug
in vitro. The values of minimal inhibitory concentrations and minimal
bactericidal concentrations have been used to quantitatively measure the
antibacterial activity of the single extracts, while the fractional inhibitory
concentration index has been considered as predictor of in vitro anticariogenic
synergistic effects. Finally, a time-kill curve method allowed for the evaluation
of the bactericidal efficacy of the combined extracts. The microbiological tests 
suggest that acacia honey, myrtle, and pomegranate extracts are able to inhibit
the cariogenic bacteria, also with synergistic effects. This study provides
useful and encouraging results for the use of natural extract combinations alone 
or in association with antibiotics (adjuvant therapy) as a valid alternative for 
the prevention and treatment of oral infectious diseases.

Copyright © 2020 Sateriale, Facchiano, Colicchio, Pagliuca, Varricchio, Paolucci,
Volpe, Salvatore and Pagliarulo.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01465 
PMCID: PMC7396681
PMID: 32849317 

