
1. Br J Pharmacol. 2020 Aug 4. doi: 10.1111/bph.15226. [Epub ahead of print]

Protective Effects of Δ9-Tetrahydrocannabinol Against Enterotoxin-induced Acute
Respiratory Distress Syndrome is Mediated by Modulation of Microbiota.

Mohammed A(1), Alghetaa H(1), Zhou J(1), Chatterjee S(2), Nagarkatti P(1),
Nagarkatti M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine.
(2)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Arnold School of Public Health,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, 29208.

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcal enterotoxin-B (SEB) is one of the most potent
bacterial superantigens that exerts profound toxic effects by inducing cytokine
storm. When SEB is inhaled, it can cause Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome
(ARDS), which is often fatal and currently there are no effective treatment
modalities.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: We used mouse model of SEB-mediated ARDS to test the
efficacy of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). These mice were monitored for lung
inflammation, alterations in gut and lung microbiota and production of
short-chain fatty acids (SCFA). Gene dysregulation of lung epithelial cells was
studied by transcriptome arrays. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) was
performed to confirm the role of microbiota in suppressing ARDS.
KEY RESULTS: While SEB triggered ARDS and 100% mortality in mice, THC protected
the mice from fatality effects. Pyrosequencing analysis revealed that THC caused 
significant and similar alterations in microbiota in the lungs and gut of mice
exposed to SEB. THC significantly increased the abundance of beneficial bacterial
species, Ruminococcus gnavus, but decreased pathogenic microbiota, Akkermansia
muciniphila. FMT confirmed that THC-mediated reversal of microbial dysbiosis
played crucial role in attenuation of SEB-mediated ARDS. THC treatment also led
to increase in SCFA, of which propionic acid was found to inhibit the
inflammatory response. Transcriptome array showed that THC up-regulated several
genes like lysozyme-1&2, β-defensin-2, claudin, zonula-1, occludin-1, Mucin2 and 
Muc5b while downregulating β-defensin-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Current study demonstrates for the first time that THC attenuates
SEB-mediated ARDS and toxicity by altering the microbiota in the lungs and the
gut as well as promoting anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory pathways.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/bph.15226 
PMCID: PMC7436585
PMID: 32754917 

