
1. Hepatology. 2020 Jun 12. doi: 10.1002/hep.31417. [Epub ahead of print]

Microbiomics, metabolomics, predicted metagenomics and hepatic steatosis in a
population-based study of 1355 adults.

Alferink LJ(1), Radjabzadeh D(2), Erler NS(3), Vojinovic D(4), Medina-Gomez C(2),
Uitterlinden AG(2)(4), Knegt RJ(1), Amin N(4), Ikram MA(4), Janssen H(5),
Kiefte-deJong JC(6), Metselaar HJ(1), Duijn CMV(4)(7), Kraaij R(2), Darwish Murad
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Toronto Center of Liver Disease, Toronto General Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Global Public Health, Leiden University College, The Hague, Den 
Haag, The Netherlands.
(7)Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Previous small studies have appraised the gut microbiome (GM) 
in steatosis, but large-scale studies are lacking. We studied the association of 
GM diversity and composition, plasma metabolites, predicted functional
metagenomics and steatosis. Approach & Results This is a cross-sectional analysis
of the prospective population-based Rotterdam Study. We used 16Sribosomal-RNA
gene sequencing and determined taxonomy using the Silva-reference database.
Alpha-and beta-diversity were calculated using Shannon-index and Bray-Curtis
dissimilarities. Differences were tested across steatosis using PerMANOVA.
Hepatic steatosis was diagnosed by ultrasonography. We subsequently selected
genera using regularized regression. The functional metagenome was predicted
based on the GM using KEGG-pathways. Serum metabolomics were assessed using
high-throughput proton nuclear magnetic resonance. All analyses were adjusted for
age, sex, BMI, alcohol, diet, and proton-pump inhibitors. We included 1355
participants of which 472 had steatosis. Alpha-diversity was lower in steatosis
(P=1.1∙10-9 ) and beta-diversity varied across steatosis strata (P=0.001). Lasso 
selected 37 genera of which three remained significantly associated after
adjustment (Coprococcus3: β=-65; Ruminococcus Gauvreauiigroup: β=62; and
Ruminococcus Gnavusgroup: β=45, Q-value =0.037). Predicted metagenome analyses
revealed that pathways of secondary bile-acid synthesis and biotin metabolism
were present and D-alanine metabolism was absent in steatosis. Metabolic profiles
showed positive associations for aromatic-and branched chain amino acids and
glycoprotein acetyls with steatosis and R. Gnavusgroup, whereas these metabolites
were inversely associated with alpha-diversity and Coprococcus3.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed, for the first time on a large-scale, the lower
microbial diversity and association of Coprococcus and Ruminococcus Gnavus with
steatosis. We additionally showed that steatosis and alpha-diversity share
-opposite- metabolic profiles.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.31417 
PMID: 32530501 

