
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Aug 5. doi: 10.1111/jam.14812. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulation of rumen fermentation and microbial community through increasing
dietary cation-anion difference in Chinese Holstein dairy cows under heat stress 
conditions.

Wang Z(1)(2), Yang DS(3), Li XY(1), Yu YN(1), Yong LY(1)(2), Zhang PH(1)(2), He
JH(1)(2), Shen WJ(1)(2), Wan FC(1)(2), Feng BL(4), Tan ZL(3), Tang SX(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Hunan Co-Innovation Center of Animal Production Safety, CICAPS, Changsha
Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory for Agro-Ecological Processes in Subtropical Region, Hunan 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Nutritional Physiology and Metabolic Process,
South-Central Experimental Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Ministry
of Agriculture, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Youzhuo Dairy Group, Changsha Hunan, People's Republic of China.

AIMS: The effect of increasing dietary cation-anion difference (DCAD) on rumen
fermentation and ruminal microbial community in dairy cows under heat stress (HS)
conditions were evaluated.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This study was performed as a two-period cross-over design
during the summer season, with eight lactating dairy cows randomly distributed to
either a control DCAD diet (CON: 33·5 mEq/100 g DM) or high DCAD diet (HDCAD:
50·8 mEq/100 g DM). Throughout the present study, the temperature and humidity
index (THI; 80·2 ± 4·29) was generally elevated above the threshold (THI = 72)
that is reported to cause HS in lactating dairy cows. Rumen liquid samples were
collected on 15 and 21 d during each 21 d-period. The absolute concentration of
ruminal total volatile fatty acid (TVFA) in HDCAD treatment was significantly
(P < 0·05) higher than those in the control, whilst the ruminal pH, NH3 -N, and
VFA molar percentages were unaffected through increasing DCAD. Furthermore, the
copy numbers of the cellulolytic bacteria Ruminococcus albus and Ruminococcus
flavefaciens in rumen fluid significantly (P < 0·05) rose along with the
increment of DCAD. Although the Alpha diversity indexes and the bacterial
microbiota structure were unaffected, increasing DCAD significantly (P < 0·05)
enriched the phylum Fibrobacteres and genus Fibrobacter in the microflora of
rumen fluid, whilst the genera Flexilinea and Dubosiella were the most
differentially abundant taxa in the control.
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing DCAD under HS conditions resulted in a greater
concentration of total VFA without affecting rumen bacteria diversity or
structure, although the enrichment of some cellulolytic/hemicellulolytic bacteria
was observed.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The present study provides information on
the modulation of rumen fermentation and microbial community through the
increment of DCAD in Holstein dairy cows under HS conditions.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14812 
PMID: 32757409 

