
1. Gut. 2020 Aug 24. pii: gutjnl-2020-321643. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321643. [Epub
ahead of print]

Metagenomics analysis of gut microbiota in response to diet intervention and
gestational diabetes in overweight and obese women: a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled clinical trial.

Mokkala K(1), Paulin N(2), Houttu N(3), Koivuniemi E(3), Pellonperä O(4), Khan
S(2), Pietilä S(2), Tertti K(4), Elo LL(2)(5), Laitinen K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Research Centre for Integrative Physiology and
Pharmacology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland Kati.Mokkala@utu.fi.
(2)Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi University,
Turku, Finland.
(3)Institute of Biomedicine, Research Centre for Integrative Physiology and
Pharmacology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Turku University Hospital, University
of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(5)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: Gut microbiota and diet are known to contribute to human metabolism.
We investigated whether the metagenomic gut microbiota composition and function
changes over pregnancy are related to gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and can
be modified by dietary supplements, fish oil and/or probiotics.
DESIGN: The gut microbiota of 270 overweight/obese women participating in a
mother-infant clinical study were analysed with metagenomics approach in early
(mean gestational weeks 13.9) and late (gestational weeks 35.2) pregnancy. GDM
was diagnosed with a 2 hour 75 g oral glucose tolerance test.
RESULTS: Unlike women with GDM, women without GDM manifested changes in relative 
abundance of bacterial species over the pregnancy, particularly those receiving
the fish oil + probiotics combination. The specific bacterial species or function
did not predict the onset of GDM nor did it differ according to GDM status,
except for the higher abundance of Ruminococcus obeum in late pregnancy in the
combination group in women with GDM compared with women without GDM. In the
combination group, weak decreases over the pregnancy were observed in basic
bacterial housekeeping functions.
CONCLUSIONS: The specific gut microbiota species do not contribute to GDM in
overweight/obese women. Nevertheless, the GDM status may disturb maternal gut
microbiota flexibility and thus limit the capacity of women with GDM to respond
to diet, as evidenced by alterations in gut microbiota observed only in women
without GDM. These findings may be important when considering the metabolic
complications during pregnancy, but further studies with larger populations are
called for to verify the findings.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321643 
PMID: 32839200 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

