
1. Food Funct. 2020 Jun 24;11(6):5142-5155. doi: 10.1039/d0fo01006e.

Medium-, long- and medium-chain-type structured lipids ameliorate high-fat
diet-induced atherosclerosis by regulating inflammation, adipogenesis, and gut
microbiota in ApoE-/- mice.

Yue C(1), Li M(1), Li J(1), Han X(1), Zhu H(1), Yu G(1), Cheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Changjiang Road,
Harbin 150036, China. yuguopingneau@hotmail.com jjcheng@neau.edu.cn.

Accumulating evidence has suggested that medium-, long-, and medium-chain (MLM)
structured lipids have anti-obesity effects, but whether they can alleviate the
development of atherosclerosis (AS) and affect the composition of the gut
microbiota in high-fat diet-fed ApoE-/- mice has not been elucidated. The present
study found that MLM structured lipid supplementation could significantly
decrease obesity-related parameters compared with high-fat diet alone in ApoE-/- 
mice. Additionally, MLM structured lipids could significantly decrease the blood 
glucose and increase the serum total antioxidant capacity (T-AOC) and superoxide 
dismutase (SOD) levels. Additionally, high-dose MLM structured lipids
supplementation could reduce the area of atherosclerotic lesions and decrease the
expression of VCAM-1, MCP-1 and CD68, which are related to inflammation in aortic
tissue. Further analysis showed that MLM structured lipids could significantly
reduce lipid accumulation in the adipose tissue of high-fat diet-fed ApoE-/-
mice. The relative protein expression of SREBP-1, ACC, FAS, C/EBPα and PPARγ was 
decreased and the ratio of p-AMPK/AMPK was increased in epididymis white adipose 
tissue (eWAT) after MLM structured lipids treatment. Additionally, MLM structured
lipids supplementation regulated the bacterial composition, including reducing
the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio, increasing the relative abundance of
short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria (Blautia and Anaerotruncus), decreasing
the relative abundance of [Ruminococcus] torques group, Ruminiclostridium 9,
Catenibacterium and [Eubacterium] fissicatena group. Spearman's correlation
analysis revealed significant correlations between changes in the gut microbiota 
and atherosclerosis-related indices. The results demonstrated that the
alleviating effects of MLM structured lipids supplementation on AS in high-fat
diet-fed ApoE-/- mice were closely related to reshaping the composition of the
gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.1039/d0fo01006e 
PMID: 32432606 

