
1. J Sci Food Agric. 2020 Jul 24. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.10686. [Epub ahead of print]

Effects of different concentrations of coated nano zinc oxide material on fecal
bacterial composition and intestinal barrier in weaned piglets.

Liu H(#)(1)(2)(3), Bai M(#)(1)(4), Xu K(1), Zhou J(1), Zhang X(2), Yu R(2), Huang
R(1), Yin Y(1)(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Laboratory for Pollution Control and Waste Utilization in
Livestock and Poultry Production, Key Laboratory of Agro-ecological Processes in 
Subtropical Region, Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Animal
Nutrition and Feed Science in South-Central, Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan
Provincial Engineering Research Center for Healthy Breeding of Livestock and
Poultry, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Changsha, China.
(2)Hangzhou King Techina Technology Company Academician Expert Workstation,
Hangzhou King Techina Technology Co. Ltd, Hangzhou, China.
(3)Anhui Tianyuanju E-commerce Co. Ltd, Fuyang, China.
(4)College of Animal Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou,
China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Coated nano zinc oxide (Cnz) is a new feed or food additive, which is
a potential replacement for a pharmacological dose level of ZnO. This study
evaluated the positive effects of different concentrations of Cnz on the
intestinal bacterial core, enterobacterial composition and mucosal barrier
function in a pig model.
RESULTS: Microbiota sequencing results showed that Cnz could significantly alter 
the intestinal microbiota composition and metabolism. Besides increasing the
richness indices (ACE and Chao1), 10% Cnz could protect the intestinal mucosal
barrier through increasing the expression of occludin and zonula occludens-1 in
the small intestine, increase the abundance of Lachnospiraceae UCG-004 and
decrease the abundance of Ruminococcus flavefaciens compared to high ZnO diet and
5% Cnz material.
CONCLUSIONS: Cnz material at 10% supplementation is more effective than a level
of 5% Cnz in increasing intestinal barrier through affecting gut microbiota. ©
2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

© 2020 Society of Chemical Industry.

DOI: 10.1002/jsfa.10686 
PMID: 32706118 

