
1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2020 Jun 18;26(7):1026-1037. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izaa001.

Bacterial Taxa and Functions Are Predictive of Sustained Remission Following
Exclusive Enteral Nutrition in Pediatric Crohn's Disease.

Jones CMA(1), Connors J(2), Dunn KA(3), Bielawski JP(3)(4), Comeau AM(5),
Langille MGI(1)(5), Van Limbergen J(2)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(3)Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(4)Department of Mathematics & Statistics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(5)Integrated Microbiome Resource (IMR), Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada.
(6)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Amsterdam Gastroenterology
and Metabolism, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology & Nutrition, 
Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiome is extensively involved in induction of remission 
in pediatric Crohn's disease (CD) patients by exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN). 
In this follow-up study of pediatric CD patients undergoing treatment with EEN,
we employ machine learning models trained on baseline gut microbiome data to
distinguish patients who achieved and sustained remission (SR) from those who did
not achieve remission nor relapse (non-SR) by 24 weeks.
METHODS: A total of 139 fecal samples were obtained from 22 patients (8-15 years 
of age) for up to 96 weeks. Gut microbiome taxonomy was assessed by 16S rRNA gene
sequencing, and functional capacity was assessed by metagenomic sequencing. We
used standard metrics of diversity and taxonomy to quantify differences between
SR and non-SR patients and to associate gut microbial shifts with fecal
calprotectin (FCP), and disease severity as defined by weighted Pediatric Crohn's
Disease Activity Index. We used microbial data sets in addition to clinical
metadata in random forests (RFs) models to classify treatment response and
predict FCP levels.
RESULTS: Microbial diversity did not change after EEN, but species richness was
lower in low-FCP samples (<250 µg/g). An RF model using microbial abundances,
species richness, and Paris disease classification was the best at classifying
treatment response (area under the curve [AUC] = 0.9). KEGG Pathways also
significantly classified treatment response with the addition of the same
clinical data (AUC = 0.8). Top features of the RF model are consistent with
previously identified IBD taxa, such as Ruminococcaceae and Ruminococcus gnavus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our machine learning approach is able to distinguish SR and non-SR
samples using baseline microbiome and clinical data.

© 2020 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izaa001 
PMCID: PMC7301407
PMID: 31961432 

