
1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jun 12;11:1192. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01192. eCollection
2020.

Behçet's Disease Under Microbiotic Surveillance? A Combined Analysis of Two
Cohorts of Behçet's Disease Patients.

van der Houwen TB(1), van Laar JAM(1), Kappen JH(2)(3), van Hagen PM(1), de Zoete
MR(4), van Muijlwijk GH(4), Berbers RM(5), Fluit AC(4), Rogers M(4), Groot J(4), 
Hazelbag CM(6), Consolandi C(7), Severgnini M(7), Peano C(8)(9), D'Elios MM(10), 
Emmi G(10), Leavis HL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section Clinical Immunology, Departments of Internal Medicine and Immunology, 
Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Immunomodulation and Tolerance Group,
Inflammation Repair and Development, Imperial College, National Heart and Lung
Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, STZ Centre of Excellence for Asthma and COPD,
Franciscus Group, Rotterdam, United Kingdom.
(4)Medical Microbiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary
Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands.
(7)National Research Council, Institute of Biomedical Technologies, Segrate,
Italy.
(8)National Research Council, Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research, UoS
Milan, Milan, Italy.
(9)Genomic Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Firenze,
Firenze, Italy.

Background: In Behçet's disease (BD), an auto-inflammatory vasculitis, an
unbalanced gut microbiota can contribute to pro-inflammatory reactions. In
separate studies, distinct pro- and anti-inflammatory bacteria associated with BD
have been identified. Methods: To establish disease-associated determinants, we
performed gut microbiome profiling in BD patients from the Netherlands (n = 19)
and Italy (n = 13), matched healthy controls (HC) from the Netherlands (n = 17)
and Italy (n = 15) and oral microbiome profiling in Dutch BD patients (n = 18)
and HC (n = 15) by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. In addition, we used fecal IgA-SEQ
analysis to identify specific IgA coated bacterial taxa in Dutch BD patients (n =
13) and HC (n = 8). Results: In BD stool samples alpha-diversity was conserved,
whereas beta-diversity analysis showed no clustering based on disease, but a
significant segregation by country of origin. Yet, a significant decrease of
unclassified Barnesiellaceae and Lachnospira genera was associated with BD
patients compared to HC. Subdivided by country, the Italian cohort displays a
significant decrease of unclassified Barnesiellaceae and Lachnospira genera, in
the Dutch cohort this decrease is only a trend. Increased IgA-coating of
Bifidobacterium spp., Dorea spp. and Ruminococcus bromii species was found in
stool from BD patients. Moreover, oral Dutch BD microbiome displayed increased
abundance of Spirochaetaceae and Dethiosulfovibrionaceae families. Conclusions:
BD patients show decreased fecal abundance of Barnesiellaceae and Lachnospira and
increased oral abundance of Spirochaetaceae and Dethiosulfovibrionaceae. In
addition, increased fecal IgA coating of Bifidobacterium, Ruminococcus bromii and
Dorea may reflect retention of anti-inflammatory species and neutralization of
pathosymbionts in BD, respectively. Additional studies are warranted to relate
intestinal microbes with the significance of ethnicity, diet, medication and
response with distinct pro- and inflammatory pathways in BD patients.

Copyright © 2020 van der Houwen, van Laar, Kappen, van Hagen, de Zoete, van
Muijlwijk, Berbers, Fluit, Rogers, Groot, Hazelbag, Consolandi, Severgnini,
Peano, D'Elios, Emmi and Leavis.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01192 
PMCID: PMC7303268
PMID: 32595645 

