
1. BMJ Open. 2020 Aug 31;10(8):e036560. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-036560.

Determining the long-term health burden and risk of sequelae for 14 foodborne
infections in British Columbia, Canada: protocol for a retrospective
population-based cohort study.

Majowicz SE(1), Panagiotoglou D(2), Taylor M(3), Gohari MR(4), Kaplan GG(5),
Chaurasia A(4), Leatherdale ST(4), Cook RJ(6), Patrick DM(3)(7), Ethelberg
S(8)(9), Galanis E(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario, Canada smajowicz@uwaterloo.ca.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Occupational Health, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada.
(4)School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Departments of Medicine and Community Health Sciences, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science, University of Waterloo,
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
(7)School of Population and Public Health, The University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(8)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Prevention, Statens Serum
Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Global Health Section, Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: Over one in eight Canadians is affected by a foodborne infection
annually; however, the long-term consequences, including the risks and costs of
sequelae, are unclear. We aim to estimate the health burden and direct costs of
14 infections commonly transmitted by food, considering the acute illness and
subsequent sequelae and mortality, for the population of British Columbia, Canada
(~4.7 million).
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will conduct a population-based retrospective cohort
study of the British Columbia provincial population, over a 10-year study period 
(1 January 2005 to 31 December 2014). Exposure is defined as a provincially
reported illness caused by Clostridium botulinum, Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium,
Cyclospora, Giardia, hepatitis A virus, Listeria, non-typhoidal Salmonella spp,
Salmonella Typhi, Salmonella Paratyphi, Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli,
Shigella, Vibrio parahaemolyticus or Yersinia (excluding pestis). We will link
individual-level longitudinal data from eight province-wide administrative health
and reportable disease databases that include physician visits, hospitalisations 
and day surgeries, deaths, stillbirths, prescription medications (except those to
treat HIV) and reportable foodborne diseases. Using these linked databases, we
will investigate the likelihood of various sequelae and death. Hazard models will
be used to estimate the risk of outcomes and their association with the type of
foodborne infection. Epidemiological analyses will be conducted to determine the 
progression of illness and the fraction of sequelae attributable to specific
foodborne infections. Economic analyses will assess the consequent direct
healthcare costs.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: This study has been approved by a University of
Waterloo Research Ethics Committee (no 30645), the University of British Columbia
Behavioral Research Ethics Board (no H16-00021) and McGill University's
Institutional Review Board (no A03-M12-19A). Results will be disseminated via
presentations to academics, public health practitioners and knowledge users, and 
publication in peer-reviewed journals. Where such publications are not open
access, manuscripts will also be available via the University of Waterloo's
Institutional Repository (https://uwspace.uwaterloo.ca).

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-036560 
PMCID: PMC7462161
PMID: 32868357 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: SEM and EG report funding
for this study as per the funding statement. SEM reports other relationships; she
is an associate editor at Epidemiology and Infection (for which she receives a
small honorarium); she has served as a paid expert on behalf of the Attorney
General of Canada in legal proceedings, providing evidence on the public health
risks and benefits of unpasteurised milk, and she is an expert on the Joint
FAO/WHO Expert Meetings on Microbiological Risk Assessment (JEMRA) Roster of
Experts. GGK reports honoraria for speaking or consultancy from Abbvie, Janssen, 
Pfizer and Takeda. He has received research support from Ferring, Janssen,
Abbvie, GlaxoSmith Kline, Merck and Shire. He shares ownership of a patent:
TREATMENT OF INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS, AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE, AND PBC. UTI Limited
Partnership, assignee. Patent WO2019046959A1. PCT/CA2018/051098. 7 September
2018. EG’ spouse works for QHR Technologies, a Canadian medical records company; 
these records were not used in this study. All other authors have nothing to
disclose.

