
1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2020 Sep 24;9(9):e1178. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1178.
eCollection 2020.

Human Salmonella Typhi exposure generates differential multifunctional
cross-reactive T-cell memory responses against Salmonella Paratyphi and invasive 
nontyphoidal Salmonella.

Rapaka RR(1)(2), Wahid R(1)(3), Fresnay S(1)(3)(4), Booth JS(1)(3), Darton
TC(5)(6), Jones C(5), Waddington CS(5)(7), Levine MM(1)(2)(3), Pollard AJ(5),
Sztein MB(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vaccine Development and Global Health University of Maryland School
of Medicine Baltimore MD USA.
(2)Department of Medicine University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore MD 
USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics University of Maryland School of Medicine Baltimore
MD USA.
(4)Present address: Stephanie Fresnay GlaxoSmithKline Rockville MD USA.
(5)Oxford Vaccine Group Department of Paediatrics University of Oxford and the
NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre Oxford UK.
(6)Present address: Thomas C Darton University of Sheffield Medical School
Sheffield UK.
(7)Present address: University of Cambridge Cambridge UK.

Objective: There are no vaccines for most of the major invasive Salmonella
strains causing severe infection in humans. We evaluated the specificity of
adaptive T memory cell responses generated after Salmonella Typhi exposure in
humans against other major invasive Salmonella strains sharing capacity for
dissemination.
Methods: T memory cells from eleven volunteers who underwent controlled oral
challenge with wt S. Typhi were characterised by flow cytometry for
cross-reactive cellular cytokine/chemokine effector responses or evidence of
degranulation upon stimulation with autologous B-lymphoblastoid cells infected
with either S. Typhi, Salmonella Paratyphi A (PA), S. Paratyphi B (PB) or an
invasive nontyphoidal Salmonella strain of the S. Typhimurium serovar (iNTSTy).
Results: Blood T-cell effector memory (TEM) responses after exposure to S. Typhi 
in humans evolve late, peaking weeks after infection in most volunteers. Induced 
multifunctional CD4+ Th1 and CD8+ TEM cells elicited after S. Typhi challenge
were cross-reactive with PA, PB and iNTSTy. The magnitude of multifunctional CD4+
TEM cell responses to S. Typhi correlated with induction of cross-reactive
multifunctional CD8+ TEM cells against PA, PB and iNTSTy. Highly multifunctional 
subsets and T central memory and T effector memory cells that re-express CD45
(TEMRA) demonstrated less heterologous T-cell cross-reactivity, and
multifunctional Th17 elicited after S. Typhi challenge was not cross-reactive
against other invasive Salmonella.
Conclusion: Gaps in cross-reactive immune effector functions in human T-cell
memory compartments were highly dependent on invasive Salmonella strain,
underscoring the importance of strain-dependent vaccination in the design of
T-cell-based vaccines for invasive Salmonella.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1178 
PMCID: PMC7512505
PMID: 33005416 

Conflict of interest statement: AJP is chair of the UK Department of Health's
Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation and the European Medicine Agency 
Scientific Advisory Group on Vaccines, and a member of WHO's Strategic Advisory
Group of Experts and an NIHR Senior Investigator. The other authors declare no
conflicts of interest.

