
1. Vet Microbiol. 2020 Sep 25;250:108867. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108867. [Epub
ahead of print]

The SPI-19 encoded T6SS is required for Salmonella Pullorum survival within avian
macrophages and initial colonization in chicken dependent on inhibition of host
immune response.

Xian H(1), Yuan Y(2), Yin C(3), Wang Z(3), Ji R(3), Chu C(3), Jiao X(3), Li Q(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Biological Hazard Factors (Animal 
Origin) for Agri-food Safety and Quality, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Yangzhou University, China; Jiangsu Key Lab of Zoonosis/Jiangsu Co-Innovation
Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and
Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Lab of Zoonosis/Jiangsu Co-Innovation Center for Prevention and
Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses, Yangzhou
University, China; Joint International Research Laboratory of Agriculture and
Agri-Product Safety, Yangzhou University, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Biological Hazard Factors (Animal 
Origin) for Agri-food Safety and Quality, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Yangzhou University, China; Jiangsu Key Lab of Zoonosis/Jiangsu Co-Innovation
Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and
Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, China; Joint International Research Laboratory of 
Agriculture and Agri-Product Safety, Yangzhou University, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control of Biological Hazard Factors (Animal 
Origin) for Agri-food Safety and Quality, Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Yangzhou University, China; Jiangsu Key Lab of Zoonosis/Jiangsu Co-Innovation
Center for Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and
Zoonoses, Yangzhou University, China; Joint International Research Laboratory of 
Agriculture and Agri-Product Safety, Yangzhou University, China. Electronic
address: qcli@yzu.edu.cn.

SalmonellaPathogenicity Island 19 (SPI-19) encoded type VI secretion system
(T6SS) is a virulence factor present in few serotypes of S. enterica, including
S. Dublin, S. Gallinarum and S. Pullorum. Comparative genomic sequence analysis
revealed that the gene clusters of SPI-19 showed high homology to T6SS2 locus
from avian pathogenic Escherichia coli, implying the similar T6SS locus is
potentially related to the host adaption of both pathogens. Deletion of SPI-19 in
S. Pullorum caused the dramatically decreased invasion into chicken LMH
epithelial cells and HD-11 macrophages, and affected survival of Salmonella
within both cells. In addition, deletion of SPI-19 caused the decreased
colonization of S. Pullorum in chicken liver, spleen, ileum, and cecum at the
initial infection stage, and induced rapid bacterial clearance. However, the
SPI-19/T6SS had no effect on bacterial killing activity and induction of
cytotoxicity to HD-11 macrophages. Further analysis demonstrated SPI-19/T6SS was 
involved in mediating the inhibition of host Th1 and Th2 immune responses,
resulting in persistent colonization of S. Pullorum in hosts.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108867 
PMID: 33010573 

