
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Sep 16;335:108884. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108884. [Epub ahead of print]

Stress resistance of emerging poultry-associated Salmonella serovars.

Guillén S(1), Marcén M(1), Álvarez I(1), Mañas P(1), Cebrián G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de
Zaragoza-CITA), Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Producción Animal y Ciencia de los Alimentos, Facultad de
Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de
Zaragoza-CITA), Zaragoza, Spain. Electronic address: guiceb@unizar.es.

In recent years, the on-farm prevalence of some poultry-related Salmonella
serovars such as S. Kentucky, S. Heidelberg, S. Livingstone and S. Mbandaka has
increased significantly, even replacing S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium as the 
most frequently isolated serovars in some production settings and countries. For 
this reason, the aim of this work was to determine the resistance to several
stressing agents and food preservation technologies, in laboratory media and in
egg products, of 4 strains of these emerging Salmonella serovars associated to
poultry and poultry products and to make comparisons with 4 S. Enteritidis
strains. First, the resistance to acid pH, hydrogen peroxide, NaCl, heat, HHP,
PEF and UV of the 8 Salmonella strains studied was determined and compared in
laboratory media. From this part of the study, it was concluded that variability 
in resistance to stress among the 8 studied strains varied depending on the
investigated agent/technology. However, differences in resistance (2D-values)
were always lower than 3.3-fold. Results obtained also indicated that the strains
of the emerging serovars studied would display lower acid and NaCl resistance,
higher heat resistance and similar oxidative, HHP, PEF and UV resistance than S. 
Enteritidis. Then, the resistance of these 8 strains was evaluated and compared
in egg, egg products and poultry manure. For some agents -including osmotic
stresses, UV and PEF- there was a very good correspondence between the results
obtained in laboratory media and in real food matrices and poultry manure
(r > 0.85; p < 0.01). A significant relationship was also found for acid and HHP 
resistance (p < 0.05) and a trend for heat resistance (p < 0.10). Therefore, in
general terms, conclusions drawn from the study carried out in laboratory media -
regarding intraspecific variability and the relative resistance of the different 
strains - might be extrapolated, although with caution, to real food scenarios.
Results obtained in this investigation would help to better understand the
physiology and ecology of Salmonella and to design better egg preservation
strategies.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108884 
PMID: 32979615 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

