
1. mBio. 2020 Sep 22;11(5). pii: e01911-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01911-20.

Genotoxic Effect of Salmonella Paratyphi A Infection on Human Primary Gallbladder
Cells.

Sepe LP(#)(1), Hartl K(#)(1)(2)(3), Iftekhar A(1), Berger H(1), Kumar N(1),
Goosmann C(1), Chopra S(4), Schmidt SC(4)(5), Gurumurthy RK(1), Meyer TF(6),
Boccellato F(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Berlin, Germany.
(2)Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medical Department, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Charité
University Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Surgery, Campus Charité Mitte and Campus Virchow Clinics,
Charité University Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Ernst von Bergmann Clinics,
Potsdam, Germany.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology,
Berlin, Germany meyer@mpiib-berlin.mpg.de francesco.boccellato@ludwig.ox.ac.uk.
(7)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Carcinoma of the gallbladder (GBC) is the most frequent tumor of the biliary
tract. Despite epidemiological studies showing a correlation between chronic
infection with Salmonella enterica Typhi/Paratyphi A and GBC, the underlying
molecular mechanisms of this fatal connection are still uncertain. The murine
serovar Salmonella Typhimurium has been shown to promote transformation of
genetically predisposed cells by driving mitogenic signaling. However, insights
from this strain remain limited as it lacks the typhoid toxin produced by the
human serovars Typhi and Paratyphi A. In particular, the CdtB subunit of the
typhoid toxin directly induces DNA breaks in host cells, likely promoting
transformation. To assess the underlying principles of transformation, we used
gallbladder organoids as an infection model for Salmonella Paratyphi A. In this
model, bacteria can invade epithelial cells, and we observed host cell DNA
damage. The induction of DNA double-strand breaks after infection depended on the
typhoid toxin CdtB subunit and extended to neighboring, non-infected cells. By
cultivating the organoid derived cells into polarized monolayers in air-liquid
interphase, we could extend the duration of the infection, and we observed an
initial arrest of the cell cycle that does not depend on the typhoid toxin.
Non-infected intoxicated cells instead continued to proliferate despite the DNA
damage. Our study highlights the importance of the typhoid toxin in causing
genomic instability and corroborates the epidemiological link between Salmonella 
infection and GBC.IMPORTANCE Bacterial infections are increasingly being
recognized as risk factors for the development of adenocarcinomas. The strong
epidemiological evidence linking Helicobacter pylori infection to stomach cancer 
has paved the way to the demonstration that bacterial infections cause DNA damage
in the host cells, initiating transformation. In this regard, the role of
bacterial genotoxins has become more relevant. Salmonella enterica serovars Typhi
and Paratyphi A have been clinically associated with gallbladder cancer. By
harnessing the stem cell potential of cells from healthy human gallbladder
explant, we regenerated and propagated the epithelium of this organ in vitro and 
used these cultures to model S. Paratyphi A infection. This study demonstrates
the importance of the typhoid toxin, encoded only by these specific serovars, in 
causing genomic instability in healthy gallbladder cells, posing intoxicated
cells at risk of malignant transformation.

Copyright © 2020 Sepe, Hartl et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01911-20 
PMCID: PMC7512552
PMID: 32963006 

