
1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Sep 10:104534. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104534. [Epub
ahead of print]

The role of animals as a source of antimicrobial resistant nontyphoidal
Salmonella causing invasive and non-invasive human disease in Vietnam.

Parisi A(1), Phuong TLT(2), Mather AE(3), Jombart T(4), Tuyen HT(2), Lan NPH(5), 
Trang NHT(2), Carrique-Mas J(6), Campbell JI(6), Trung NV(2), Glass K(1), Kirk
MD(1), Baker S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research School of Population Health, Australian National University,
Australia.
(2)The Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Wellcome Trust Major Overseas Programme,
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(3)Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich, United Kingdom.
(4)The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(5)The Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam.
(6)The Hospital for Tropical Diseases, Wellcome Trust Major Overseas Programme,
Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam; Centre for 
Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(7)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology & Infectious Disease (CITIID),
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: sgb47@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS) are associated with both diarrhea and
bacteremia. Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is common in NTS in low-middle income 
countries, but the major source(s) of AMR NTS in humans are not known. Here, we
aimed to assess the role of animals as a source of AMR in human NTS infections in
Vietnam. We retrospectively combined and analyzed 672 NTS human and animal
isolates from four studies in southern Vietnam and compared serovars, sequence
types (ST), and AMR profiles. We generated a population structure of circulating 
organisms and aimed to attribute sources of AMR in NTS causing invasive and
noninvasive disease in humans using Bayesian multinomial mixture models.
RESULTS: Among 672 NTS isolates, 148 (22%) originated from human blood, 211 (31%)
from human stool, and 313 (47%) from animal stool. The distribution of serovars, 
STs, and AMR profiles differed among sources; serovars Enteritidis, Typhimurium, 
and Weltevreden were the most common in human blood, human stool, and animals,
respectively. We identified an association between the source of NTS and AMR
profile; the majority of AMR isolates were isolated from human blood (p < 0.001).
Modelling by ST-AMR profile found chickens and pigs were likely the major sources
of AMR NTS in human blood and stool, respectively; but unsampled sources were
found to be a major contributor.
CONCLUSIONS: Antimicrobial use in food animals is hypothesized to play role in
the emergence of AMR in human pathogens. Our cross-sectional population-based
approach suggests a significant overlap between AMR in NTS in animals and humans,
but animal NTS does explain the full extent of AMR in human NTS infections in
Vietnam.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104534 
PMID: 32920195 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

