
1. PLoS Biol. 2020 Sep 29;18(9):e3000813. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000813.
eCollection 2020 Sep.

Short-chain fatty acids bind to apoptosis-associated speck-like protein to
activate inflammasome complex to prevent Salmonella infection.

Tsugawa H(1), Kabe Y(1)(2), Kanai A(1), Sugiura Y(1), Hida S(3), Taniguchi S(4), 
Takahashi T(5), Matsui H(6), Yasukawa Z(7), Itou H(8), Takubo K(9), Suzuki H(10),
Honda K(11), Handa H(12), Suematsu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), Core Research for
Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Health Sciences, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Comprehensive Cancer Therapy, Shinshu University School
Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.
(5)Suntory Foundation for Life Sciences, Bioorganic Research Institute, Kyoto,
Japan.
(6)Omura Satoshi Memorial Institute, Kitasato University, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)TAIYO KAGAKU CO., LTD., Mie, Japan.
(8)Meiji Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
(11)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Chemical Biology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) produced by gastrointestinal microbiota regulate 
immune responses, but host molecular mechanisms remain unknown. Unbiased
screening using SCFA-conjugated affinity nanobeads identified
apoptosis-associated speck-like protein (ASC), an adaptor protein of inflammasome
complex, as a noncanonical SCFA receptor besides GPRs. SCFAs promoted
inflammasome activation in macrophages by binding to its ASC PYRIN domain.
Activated inflammasome suppressed survival of Salmonella enterica serovar
Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) in macrophages by pyroptosis and facilitated
neutrophil recruitment to promote bacterial elimination and thus inhibit systemic
dissemination in the host. Administration of SCFAs or dietary fibers, which are
fermented to SCFAs by gut bacteria, significantly prolonged the survival of S.
Typhimurium-infected mice through ASC-mediated inflammasome activation. SCFAs
penetrated into the inflammatory region of the infected gut mucosa to protect
against infection. This study provided evidence that SCFAs suppress Salmonella
infection via inflammasome activation, shedding new light on the therapeutic
activity of dietary fiber.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3000813 
PMID: 32991574 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

