
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Oct 2. pii: AEM.01204-20. doi: 10.1128/AEM.01204-20.
[Epub ahead of print]

Selection for resistance to a glyphosate-containing herbicide in Salmonella
enterica does not result in a sustained activation of the tolerance response or
increased cross-tolerance and cross-resistance to clinically important
antibiotics.

Pöppe J(1), Bote K(1), Ramesh A(1), Murugaiyan J(1)(2), Kuropka B(3), Kühl M(1), 
Johnston P(4)(5)(6), Roesler U(1), Makarova O(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infection
Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology & Biotechnology, SRM University-AP, Andhra Pradesh,
India.
(3)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(4)Evolutionary Biology, Institute for Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(5)Berlin Center for Genomics in Biodiversity Research, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries (IGB), Berlin,
Germany.
(7)Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health, Centre for Infection
Medicine, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany olga.makarova@fu-berlin.de
tierhygiene@vetmed.fu-berlin.de.

Evolution of bacterial tolerance to antimicrobials precedes evolution of
resistance and may result in cross-tolerance, cross-resistance or collateral
sensitivity to other antibiotics. Transient exposure of gut bacteria to
glyphosate, the world's most widely used herbicide, has been linked to the
activation of the stress response and changes in susceptibility to antibiotics.
In this study, we investigated whether a chronic exposure to a
glyphosate-containing herbicide (GBH) results in resistance, a constitutive
activation of the tolerance and stress response and cross-tolerance or
cross-resistance to antibiotics. Of the ten farm animals-derived clinical
isolates of Salmonella enterica subjected to experimental evolution in increasing
concentrations of GBH, three isolates showed a stable resistance with mutations
associated with the glyphosate target gene aroA and no fitness costs. The global 
quantitative proteomics analysis demonstrated activation of the cellular
tolerance and stress response during the transient exposure to GBH, but not
constitutively in the resistant mutants. Resistant mutants displayed no
cross-resistance or cross-tolerance to antibiotics. These results suggest that
while transient exposure to GBH triggers cellular tolerance response in
Salmonella enterica, this response does not become genetically fixed after
selection for resistance to GBH and does not result in increased cross-tolerance 
or cross-resistance to clinically important antibiotics under our experimental
conditions.ImportanceGlyphosate-based herbicides (GBH) are among the world's most
popular, with traces commonly found in food, feed and the environment. Such high 
ubiquity means that the herbicide may come into contact with various
microorganisms, on which it acts as an antimicrobial and may select for
resistance and cross-resistance to clinically important antibiotics. It is
therefore important to estimate whether the widespread use of pesticides may be
an underappreciated source of antibiotic resistant microorganisms that may
compromise efficiency of antibiotic treatments in humans and animals.

Copyright © 2020 Pöppe et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01204-20 
PMID: 33008821 

