
1. RNA. 2020 Sep 28. pii: rna.077354.120. doi: 10.1261/rna.077354.120. [Epub ahead
of print]

Solution structure and RNA-binding of a minimal ProQ-homolog from Legionella
pneumophila (Lpp1663).

Immer C(1), Hacker C(1), Wohnert J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biosciences and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance (BMRZ), Goethe-University Frankfurt.
(2)Institute of Molecular Biosciences and Center for Biomolecular Magnetic
Resonance (BMRZ), Goethe-University Frankfurt woehnert@bio.uni-frankfurt.de.

Small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) play an important role for posttranscriptional gene
regulation in bacteria. sRNAs recognize their target messenger RNAs (mRNAs) by
base pairing, which is often facilitated by interactions with the bacterial
RNA-binding proteins Hfq or ProQ. The FinO/ProQ RNA-binding protein domain was
first discovered in the bacterial repressor of conjugation, FinO. Since then, the
functional role of FinO/ProQ-like proteins in posttranscriptional gene regulation
was extensively studied in particular in the enterobacteria E. coli and
Salmonella enterica and a wide range of sRNA-targets was identified for these
proteins. In addition, enterobacterial ProQ homologs also recognize and protect
the 3'-ends of a number of mRNAs from exonucleolytic degradation. However, the
RNA-binding properties of FinO/ProQ proteins with regard to the recognition of
different RNA targets are not yet fully understood. Here, we present the solution
NMR structure of the so far functionally uncharacterized ProQ homolog Lpp1663
from Legionella pneumophila as a newly confirmed member and a minimal model
system of the FinO/ProQ protein family. In addition, we characterize the
RNA-binding preferences of Lpp1663 with high resolution NMR spectroscopy and
isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC). Our results suggest a binding preference 
for single-stranded uridine-rich RNAs in the vicinity of stable stem-loop
structures. According to chemical shift perturbation experiments, the
single-stranded U-rich RNAs interact mainly with a conserved RNA-binding surface 
on the concave site of Lpp1663.

Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.077354.120 
PMID: 32989045 

