
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Sep 4. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14599. [Epub ahead of print]

A holin/peptidoglycan hydrolase-dependent protein secretion system.

Palmer T(1), Finney A(2), Saha CK(3), Atkinson GC(3), Sargent F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Microbes in Health & Disease, Newcastle University Biosciences Institute,
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Plant & Microbial Biology, School of Natural and Environmental Sciences,
Faculty of Science, Agriculture & Engineering, Newcastle University, Newcastle
upon Tyne, NE2 4BF, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Umeå Centre for Microbial Research, Umeå
University, Sweden.

Gram-negative bacteria have evolved numerous pathways to secrete proteins across 
their complex cell envelopes. Here, we describe a protein secretion system which 
uses a holin membrane protein in tandem with a cell wall editing enzyme to
mediate the secretion of substrate proteins from the periplasm to the cell
exterior. The identity of the cell wall editing enzymes employed was found to
vary across biological systems. For instance, the chitinase secretion pathway of 
Serratia marcescens uses an endopeptidase to facilitate secretion, whereas the
secretion of Typhoid toxin in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi relies on a
muramidase. Various families of holins are also predicted to be involved. Genomic
analysis indicates that this pathway is conserved and implicated in the secretion
of hydrolytic enzymes and toxins for a range of bacteria. The pairing of holins
from different families with various types of peptidoglycan hydrolases suggests
that this secretion pathway evolved multiple times. We suggest that the
complementary bodies of evidence presented is sufficient to propose that the
pathway be named the Type 10 Secretion System (TXSS). Potential mechanisms for
secretion across the outer membrane are discussed.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14599 
PMID: 32885520 

