
1. Biotechnol Appl Biochem. 2020 Sep 16. doi: 10.1002/bab.2029. [Epub ahead of
print]

Development of rapid gold nanoparticles based lateral flow assays for
simultaneous detection of Shigella and Salmonella genera.

Yahaya ML(1), Zakaria ND(2), Noordin R(2), Abdul Razak K(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials and Mineral Resources Engineering, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Nibong Tebal, Penang, Malaysia.
(2)Nanobiotechnology Research and Innovation (NanoBri), Institute for Research in
Molecular Medicine, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Nibong Tebal, Penang, Malaysia.

Salmonella and Shigella genera are common pathogens that contaminate foods and
beverages. Lateral flow assays (LFA) are commonly used to detect these pathogens.
However, most of the developed LFAs are for single detection. Simultaneous
detection of pathogens is required to reduce cost and time. In this work, 40 nm
gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) were synthesized using the seeding growth method as
labeling agent. The AuNPs were characterized and conjugated with mouse anti-Gram 
negative endotoxin antibody. The nitrocellulose membrane HF135 was immobilized
with anti-mouse IgG antibody as a control line and two separate test lines with
either anti-Shigella or anti-Salmonella antibody, respectively. Color intensity
of test lines was observed for positive samples. A milk sample was used as proof 
of concept to mimic actual contamination. The limit of detection of the LFA was
3.0 × 106 CFU/mL for multiplex detection of Shigella flexneri and Salmonella
Typhi and for both single detections. The result was comparable with the
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) analysis. The produced LFA could
differentiate between Shigella flexneri, Shigella boydii, Salmonella Enteritidis,
and Salmonella Typhi. The developed LFA was able to identify Shigella flexneri
and Salmonella Typhi with good sensitivity in milk samples, thus, beneficial to
ensure the safety of food before entering the market.

© 2020 International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bab.2029 
PMID: 32935878 

