
1. Sci Rep. 2020 Aug 10;10(1):13449. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-70528-7.

Cross-talk between airway and gut microbiome links to IgE responses to house dust
mites in childhood airway allergies.

Chiu CY(1), Chan YL(2)(3), Tsai MH(4), Wang CJ(5), Chiang MH(6), Chiu CC(5), Su
SC(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital at Linkou, and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
pedchestic@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Clinical Informatics and Medical Statistics Research Center, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Keelung, and Chang
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Division of Pediatric Pulmonology, Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital at Linkou, and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(6)Clinical Metabolomics Core Laboratory, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital at Linkou,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Whole-Genome Research Core Laboratory of Human Diseases, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan. zenith5862@hotmail.com.
(8)Central Research Laboratory, XiaMen Chang Gung Hospital, Xiamen, China.
zenith5862@hotmail.com.

A connection between airway and gut microbiota related to allergen exposure in
childhood allergies was not well addressed. We aimed to identify the microbiota
alterations in the airway and gut related to mite-specific IgE responses in young
children with airway allergies. This study enrolled 60 children, including 38
mite-sensitized children (20 rhinitis and 18 asthma), and 22 non-mite-sensitized 
healthy controls. Microbiome composition analysis of the throat swab and stool
samples was performed using bacterial 16S rRNA sequencing. An integrative
analysis of the airway and stool microbial profiling associated with IgE
reactions in childhood allergic rhinitis and asthma was examined. The Chao1 and
Shannon indices in the airway were significantly lower than those in the stool.
Additionally, an inverse association of the airway microbial diversity with house
dust mite (HDM) sensitization and allergic airway diseases was noted. Fecal IgE
levels were positively correlated with the serum Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus- 
and Dermatophagoides farinae-specific IgE levels. Airway Leptotrichia spp.
related to asthma were strongly correlated with fecal Dorea and Ruminococcus
spp., which were inversely associated with fecal IgE levels and risk of allergic 
rhinitis. Moreover, four airway genera, Campylobacter, Selenomonas, Tannerella,
and Atopobium, were negatively correlated with both serum mite-specific and fecal
IgE levels. Among them, the airway Selenomonas and Atopobium spp. were positively
correlated with stool Blautia and Dorea spp. related to asthma and allergic
rhinitis, respectively. In conclusion, airway microbial dysbiosis in response to 
HDM and its cross-talk with the gut microbial community is related to allergic
airway diseases in early childhood.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-70528-7 
PMCID: PMC7417544
PMID: 32778700 

