
1. J Clin Periodontol. 2020 Aug;47(8):980-990. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13330. Epub 2020
Jun 26.

Differences in the periodontal microbiome of successfully treated and persistent 
aggressive periodontitis.

Nibali L(1)(2), Sousa V(2), Davrandi M(3), Spratt D(3), Alyahya Q(4), Dopico
J(5), Donos N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Periodontology Unit, Centre for Host Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of
Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(2)Centre for Oral Immunobiology & Regenerative Medicine & Centre for Oral
Clinical Research, Institute of Dentistry, Barts and The London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University London, London, UK.
(3)Microbial Diseases Department, University College London Eastman Dental
Institute, London, UK.
(4)Periodontology Unit, University College London Eastman Dental Institute,
London, UK.
(5)Periodontics Department, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de
Compostela, Spain.

AIMS: The primary aim of this investigation was to analyse the periodontal
microbiome in patients with aggressive periodontitis (AgP) following treatment.
METHODS: Sixty-six AgP patients were recalled on average 7 years after completion
of active periodontal treatment and had subgingival plaque samples collected and 
processed for 16S rRNA gene sequencing analyses.
RESULTS: Of 66 participants, 52 showed persistent periodontal disease, while 13
participants were considered as "successfully treated AgP" (no probing pocket
depths >4 mm) and 1 was fully edentulous. Genera associated with persistent
generalized disease included Actinomyces, Alloprevotella, Capnocytophaga,
Filifactor, Fretibacterium, Fusobacterium, Leptotrichia, Mogibacterium,
Saccharibacteria [G-1], Selenomonas and Treponema. "Successfully treated"
patients harboured higher proportions of Haemophilus, Rothia, and Lautropia and
of Corynebacterium, Streptococcus and Peptidiphaga genera. Overall, patients with
persistent generalized AgP (GAgP) revealed higher alpha diversity compared to
persistent localized AgP (LAgP) and stable patients (p < .001). Beta diversity
analyses revealed significant differences only between stable and persistent GAgP
groups (p = .004).
CONCLUSION: Patients with persistent AgP showed a more dysbiotic subgingival
biofilm than those who have been successfully treated. It remains to be
established whether such differences were predisposing to disease activity or
were a result of a dysbiotic change associated with disease recurrence in the
presence of sub-standard supportive periodontal therapy or other patient-related 
factors.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Periodontology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13330 
PMID: 32557763 

