
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2020 Jul;115:104742. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104742. Epub
2020 May 7.

Characterization of the subgingival microbiota in the peritoneal dialysis
patients with periodontitis.

Zhang X(1), Chen H(2), Lu W(2), Zhu L(3), Zhou W(4), Song Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai,
China; Department of Stomatology, Eye and Dental Diseases Prevention and
Treatment Center of Pudong New Area, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai,
China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, The Second Military
Medical Univeisity, Shanghai, China.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai,
China; Laboratory of Oral Microbiota and Systemic Diseases, Shanghai Research
Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
zhouwei@shsmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Periodontology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, College of
Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Stomatology & Shanghai Research Institute of
Stomatology, National Clinical Research Center for Oral Diseases, Shanghai,
China. Electronic address: szhongchen@sina.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Periodontitis is an oral chronic inflammatory disease
caused by dental plaque. It is comorbid with numerous systemic diseases and
associated with several predisposing factors, such as chronic kidney disease
(CKD). Peritoneal dialysis is one of the ultimate treatments for patients with
severe CKD. However, peritoneal dialysis patients with periodontitis often will
be accompanied with more poor oral hygiene and periodontal clinical indexes. This
study aimed to compare the microbial flora of periodontitis patients with or
without peritoneal dialysis.
METHODS: Sixteen peritoneal dialysis patients with periodontitis (P group) and 16
patients with periodontitis only (C group) were selected. Subgingival plaque
samples of them were processed for bioinformatics analysis by 16S rDNA gene
sequencing.
RESULTS: The diversity indices and species richness in the P group were
insignificantly higher than that in the C group (P > 0.05). The two groups
exhibited different microbial community structure. At Genus level,
Prevotellaceae, Selenomonas, Aggregatibacter, Anaeroglobus, TM7_[G-5], and
Centipeda were significantly enriched in the P group than those in the C group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that specific microbes enriched in the
subgingival flora of peritoneal dialysis patients with periodontitis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104742 
PMID: 32416352 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

