
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Sep 30. doi: 10.1111/jam.14873. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of different glucogenic to lipogenic nutrient ratios on rumen fermentation
and bacterial community in vitro.

Hua D(1)(2), Zhao Y(1), Nan X(1), Xue F(1), Wang Y(1), Jiang L(3), Xiong B(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Institute of Animal Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, 100193, China.
(2)Animal Nutrition Group, Department of Animal Sciences, Wageningen University &
Research, Wageningen, 6708 WD, the Netherlands.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory for Dairy Cattle Nutrition, Beijing Agricultural
College, Beijing, 102206, China.

AIMS: This study was to investigate the effect of different ratios of glucogenic 
to lipogenic nutrients on rumen fermentation and the corresponding ruminal
bacterial communities.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Four diets including glucogenic diet (G), lipogenic diet
(L), two mixed diets: GL1 (G: L = 2: 1) and GL2 (G: L = 1: 2), served as
substrates and were incubated with rumen fluid in vitro. The results revealed
that the gas production, dry matter digestibility, and propionate proportion were
significantly increased by the G diet than others. The G diet increased the
bacterial genera of Succinivibrionaceae_UCG_002, Succinivibrio, Selenomonas_1,
and Ruminobacter but decreased some cellulolytic bacteria including the
Eubacterium and several genera in family Ruminococcaceae than others.
CONCLUSIONS: When the glucogenic nutrient was above 1/3 of the dietary energy
source among the four diets, the in vitro incubation had a higher feed
digestibility and lower acetate to propionate ratio. Bacterial genera including
Selenomonas, Succinivibrio, Ruminobacter, centain genera in Ruminococcaceae,
Christensenellaceae_R-7_group, and Eubacterium, were more sensitive to the
glucogenic to lipogenic nutrients ratio.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The present study provides a new
perspective about the effect of dietary glucogenic to lipogenic ingredient ratios
on rumen metabolism by comparing end-products, gas production, and bacterial
composition via an in vitro technique.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14873 
PMID: 32998176 

