
1. Aging (Albany NY). 2020 Jul 7;12(13):13090-13114. doi: 10.18632/aging.103399.
Epub 2020 Jul 7.

Changes of saliva microbiota in the onset and after the treatment of diabetes in 
patients with periodontitis.

Yang Y(1), Liu S(2)(3)(4), Wang Y(2)(3), Wang Z(1), Ding W(1), Sun X(5), He K(6),
Feng Q(2)(3)(7), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases Hospital of Shandong First Medical
University, Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(2)Department of Human Microbiome, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Cheeloo
College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Oral Tissue Regeneration and Shandong
Engineering Laboratory for Dental Materials and Oral Tissue Regeneration, Jinan, 
Shandong, China.
(4)School of Basic Medical Science, Cheeloo College of Medicine Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(5)Shandong University Hospital, Jinan, Shandong, China.
(6)Beijing Key Laboratory for Precision Medicine of Chronic Heart Failure,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao,
Shandong, China.

The relationship between type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and oral microbiota is
still insufficiently recognized. In the present study, we compared the salivary
microbiome of nondiabetic individuals, treatment-naïve diabetic patients, and
diabetic patients treated with metformin or a combination of insulin and other
drugs. The α- and β-diversity demonstrated significant differences in the
salivary microbiome between the nondiabetic people and patients with a history of
diabetes, while little divergence was found among individuals with a history of
diabetes. After characterizing the effects of periodontitis on the microbial
composition of each group, the salivary microbiome of the treatment-naïve
diabetic patient group was compared with that of nondiabetic people and the
metformin/combined treatment groups. The results revealed changes in the contents
of certain bacteria after both the onset and the treatment of diabetes; among
these differential bacteria, Blautia_wexlerae, Lactobacillus_fermentum,
Nocardia_coeliaca and Selenomonas_artemidis varied in all processes. A subsequent
correlational analysis of the differential bacteria and clinical characteristics 
demonstrated that salivary microbes were related to drug treatment and certain
pathological changes. Finally, the four common differential bacteria were
employed for distinguishing the treatment-naïve diabetic patients from the
nondiabetic people and the treated patients, with prediction accuracies of 83.3%,
75% and 75%, respectively.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.103399 
PMCID: PMC7377876
PMID: 32634783 

