
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 May 5;10:167. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00167.
eCollection 2020.

Significant Short-Term Shifts in the Microbiomes of Smokers With Periodontitis
After Periodontal Therapy With Amoxicillin & Metronidazole as Revealed by 16S
rDNA Amplicon Next Generation Sequencing.

Hagenfeld D(1), Matern J(1), Prior K(1), Harks I(1), Eickholz P(2), Lorenz K(3), 
Kim TS(4), Kocher T(5), Meyle J(6), Kaner D(7)(8), Schlagenhauf U(9), Harmsen
D(1), Ehmke B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Operative Dentistry, Münster University
Hospital, Münster, Germany.
(2)Department of Periodontology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe-University Frankfurt,
Frankfurt, Germany.
(3)Department of Periodontology, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(4)Section of Periodontology, Department of Conservative Dentistry, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(5)Unit of Periodontology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
(6)Department of Periodontology, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany.
(7)Department of Periodontology, Dental School, Faculty of Health, University of 
Witten/Herdecke, Witten, Germany.
(8)Departments of Periodontology and Synoptic Dentistry, Charité University
Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Department of Periodontology, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.

The aim of this follow-up study was, to compare the effects of mechanical
periodontal therapy with or without adjunctive amoxicillin and metronidazole on
the subgingival microbiome of smokers with periodontitis using 16S rDNA amplicon 
next generation sequencing. Fifty-four periodontitis patients that smoke received
either non-surgical periodontal therapy with adjunctive amoxicillin and
metronidazole (n = 27) or with placebos (n = 27). Subgingival plaque samples were
taken before and two months after therapy. Bacterial genomic DNA was isolated and
the V4 hypervariable region of the bacterial 16S rRNA genes was amplified. Up to 
96 libraries were normalized and pooled for Illumina MiSeq paired-end sequencing 
with almost fully overlapping 250 base pairs reads. Exact ribosomal sequence
variants (RSVs) were inferred with DADA2. Microbial diversity and changes on the 
genus and RSV level were analyzed with non-parametric tests and a negative
binomial regression model, respectively. Before therapy, the demographic,
clinical, and microbial parameters were not significantly different between the
placebo and antibiotic groups. Two months after the therapy, clinical parameters 
improved and there was a significantly increased dissimilarity of microbiomes
between the two groups. In the antibiotic group, there was a significant
reduction of genera classified as Porphyromonas, Tannerella, and Treponema, and
22 other genera also decreased significantly, while Selenomonas, Capnocytophaga, 
Actinomycetes, and five other genera significantly increased. In the placebo
group, however, there was not a significant decrease in periodontal pathogens
after therapy and only five other genera decreased, while Veillonella and nine
other genera increased. We conclude that in periodontitis patients who smoke,
microbial shifts occurred two months after periodontal therapy with either
antibiotics or placebo, but genera including periodontal pathogens decreased
significantly only with adjunctive antibiotics.

Copyright © 2020 Hagenfeld, Matern, Prior, Harks, Eickholz, Lorenz, Kim, Kocher, 
Meyle, Kaner, Schlagenhauf, Harmsen and Ehmke.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00167 
PMCID: PMC7232543
PMID: 32477961 

