
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 11;149:104479. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104479. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Oral microbial community analysis of the patients in the progression of liver
cancer.

Li D(1), Xi W(2), Zhang Z(3), Ren L(3), Deng C(3), Chen J(3), Sun C(3), Zhang
N(3), Xu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and immunology, School of Health Sciences Center,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China; Department of Stomatology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China.
(2)Stomatology Department, Xi'an Gaoxin Hospital, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology and immunology, School of Health Sciences Center,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address:
xujiru@mail.xjtu.edu.cn.

Liver disease has been reported to associate with oral microbiota. This study
aimed to identify the salivary microbial structure in liver disease patients and 
determine whether the disease progression influence the bacterial composition.
16S rDNA high-throughput sequencing and bioinformatic analysis were used to
examine oral bacterial diversity in the different status of hepatitis patients
including 6 patients with Hepatitis B (Y), 6 patients with Hepatitis B Cirrhosis 
(YY) and 6 patients with liver cancer (C), and 6 healthy controls (T).
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the genera of Streptococcus, Prevotella,
Actinomyces, Veillonella and Neisseria are predominant genus in the saliva of Y, 
YY, C patients and T group. Lautropia, Abiotrophia and Veillonella were enriched 
in Y patients, while Treponema, Selenomonas and Oribacterium were also existed in
YY patients. Haemophilus, Porphyromonas and Filifactor had high abundance in C
patients. The genera of Moryella, Leptotrichia, Lactobacillus, Dialister,
Serratia, Enterococcus and Actinobacillus were decreased in all patient samples
compared with healthy control samples which may be used for treatment of liver
disease. Diversity analyses showed decreased diversity of salivary bacterial
communities was discovered in the progress of the liver disease. These findings
identified the oral microbiota dysbiosis in liver disease, which may providing
available information and possible diagnostic biomarkers for liver patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104479 
PMID: 32920149 

