
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 18;149:104508. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104508. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Synergistic bactericidal profiling of prodigiosin extracted from Serratia
marcescens in combination with antibiotics against pathogenic bacteria.

Gohil N(1), Bhattacharjee G(1), Singh V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Indrashil University, Rajpur,
Mehsana, Gujarat, India.
(2)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Indrashil University, Rajpur,
Mehsana, Gujarat, India. Electronic address: vijaisingh15@gmail.com.

The emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria is on the rise and the
situation has been worsening with each passing day, which is evident from the
outpouring number of reports about how more and more pathogens are becoming
resistant to even the third and fourth generations of antibiotics. Lately,
combination therapies or drug synergy have been giving promising results in
curbing infections since it delineates its action on multiple aspects as compared
to monotherapies. In this study, we used prodigiosin, a bacterial pigment endowed
with magnificent biological properties, in combination with six antibiotics to
study its effect on Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and
Chromobacterium violaceum. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum
bactericidal concentration (MBC) of prodigiosin against the test organisms was
determined and a checkerboard assay of prodigiosin with various antibiotic
combinations was performed with an aim to abate antimicrobial resistance. MIC and
MBC of prodigiosin was obtained in the range of 4-16 μg/mL, which was lower than 
that of most test antibiotics. Coupling prodigiosin with other test antibiotics
exhibited an excellent synergy profile against all test organisms and the effects
were reported to be either synergistic or additive. In the case of S. aureus and 
C. violaceum, all combinations were found to be synergic, and remarkably for S.
aureus, FBC index was reported to be as low as ≤0.25 with all of the test
antibiotics. Therefore, it is deduced that prodigiosin augments and intensifies
the action of antibiotics, and results in a double-whammy against the MDR
strains.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104508 
PMCID: PMC7499092
PMID: 32956792 

