
1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2020 Sep 10;114:103864. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2020.103864. [Epub
ahead of print]

Azadirachtin interferes with basal immunity and microbial homeostasis in the
Rhodnius prolixus midgut.

Vieira CS(1), Figueiredo MB(2), Moraes CDS(2), Pereira SB(2), Dyson P(3), Mello
CB(4), Castro DP(1), Azambuja P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Fisiologia de Insetos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IOC/FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; Departamento de 
Entomologia Molecular, Instituto Nacional de Entomologia Molecular (INCT-EM), Rio
de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Bioquímica e Fisiologia de Insetos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz,
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz (IOC/FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)School of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea, UK.
(4)Laboratório de Biologia de Insetos, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niteroi, 
RJ, Brazil; Departamento de Entomologia Molecular, Instituto Nacional de
Entomologia Molecular (INCT-EM), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; Programa de
Pós-Graduação Em Ciências e Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal Fluminense,
Niteroi, RJ, Brazil.
(5)Departamento de Entomologia Molecular, Instituto Nacional de Entomologia
Molecular (INCT-EM), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil; Programa de Pós-Graduação Em
Ciências e Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Niteroi, RJ, Brazil.
Electronic address: Patriciaazambuja@id.uff.br.

Rhodnius prolixus is an insect vector of two flagellate parasites, Trypanosoma
rangeli and Trypanosoma cruzi, the latter being the causative agent of Chagas
disease in Latin America. The R. prolixus neuroendocrine system regulates the
synthesis of the steroid hormone ecdysone, which is essential for not only
development and molting but also insect immunity. Knowledge for how this
modulates R. prolixus midgut immune responses is essential for understanding
interactions between the vector, its parasites and symbiotic microbes. In the
present work, we evaluated the effects of ecdysone inhibition on R. prolixus
humoral immunity and homeostasis with its microbiota, using the triterpenoid
natural product, azadirachtin. Our results demonstrated that azadirachtin
promoted a fast and lasting inhibitory effect on expression of both RpRelish, a
nuclear factor kappa B transcription factor (NF-kB) component of the IMD pathway,
and several antimicrobial peptide (AMP) genes. On the other hand, RpDorsal,
encoding the equivalent NF-kB transcription factor in the Toll pathway, and the
defC AMP gene were upregulated later in azadirachtin treated insects. The
treatment also impacted on proliferation of Serratia marcescens, an abundant
commensal bacterium. The simultaneous administration of ecdysone and azadirachtin
in R. prolixus blood meals counteracted the azadirachtin effects on insect
molting and also on expression of RpRelish and AMPs genes. These results support 
the direct involvement of ecdysone in regulation of the IMD pathway in the
Rhodnius prolixus gut.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2020.103864 
PMID: 32918931 

