
1. PLoS One. 2020 Sep 18;15(9):e0238931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238931.
eCollection 2020.

Mosquito midgut Enterobacter cloacae and Serratia marcescens affect the fitness
of adult female Anopheles gambiae s.l.

Ezemuoka LC(1), Akorli EA(2), Aboagye-Antwi F(3), Akorli J(2)(4).

Author information: 
(1)African Regional Postgraduate Programme in Insect Science (ARPPIS), University
of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research,
University of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(3)Department of Animal Biology and Conservation Science, University of Ghana,
Legon, Accra, Ghana.
(4)West African Centre for Cell Biology of Infectious Diseases, University of
Ghana, Legon, Accra, Ghana.

Some bacteria species found in the mosquito midgut have demonstrated their role
in interrupting the development of Plasmodium within the midgut of the Anopheles 
mosquito and have been identified as potential candidates for novel
bacteria-mediated disease control. However, to use these bacteria successfully in
biocontrol mechanisms their effect on the fitness of the vector into which they
have been introduced has to be evaluated. This study investigated the effect of
two such bacteria candidates, Enterobacter cloacae and Serratia marcescens, on
Anopheles gambiae s.l. fitness. Pupae and larvae of Anopheles gambiae s.l.
mosquitoes were collected by dipping method and reared to adults. The effect of
these bacteria on mosquito fitness was assessed by reintroducing isolates of each
bacteria separately into antibiotic-treated female adult mosquitoes through sugar
meal. Wild type (non-antibiotic-treated) mosquitoes and those antibiotic-treated 
with no bacteria reintroduction were used as controls. The mosquitoes were
monitored on longevity/survival, fecundity, hatch rate, and larval survival. The 
antibiotic-treated adult mosquitoes had reduced life span with median survival of
14 days while the bacteria-reintroduced groups and the wild type survived to day 
22 (p< 0.0001). Treatment with Enterobacter and Serratia did not affect the
average egg deposition (p>0.05) but they affected hatch rates positively (p =
0.008). There was, however, some evidence that suggests Enterobacter could have a
positive effect on larval development (p < 0.0001). With no observed negative
effect on survival/longevity of Anopheles gambiae, introducing E. cloacae and S. 
marcescens in future bacteria-associated control strategies is unlikely to result
in mosquitoes that will be outlived by the wild population. This, however,
requires evaluations under field conditions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0238931 
PMCID: PMC7500640
PMID: 32946471 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

