
1. ISME J. 2020 Sep 7. doi: 10.1038/s41396-020-00763-3. [Epub ahead of print]

Microbial interactions in the mosquito gut determine Serratia colonization and
blood-feeding propensity.

Kozlova EV(1), Hegde S(2), Roundy CM(3), Golovko G(4), Saldaña MA(1)(5), Hart
CE(6)(7), Anderson ER(2), Hornett EA(2)(8), Khanipov K(4), Popov VL(1), Pimenova 
M(4), Zhou Y(9), Fovanov Y(4), Weaver SC(3), Routh AL(9), Heinz E(10), Hughes
GL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
USA.
(2)Departments of Vector Biology and Tropical Disease Biology, Centre for
Neglected Tropical Disease, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
(3)World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, Institute for
Human Infections and Immunity, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Sealy Center for Structural
Biology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Paediatrics and Tropical Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.
(6)The Institute for Translational Science, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX, USA.
(7)Institute for Global Health and Translational Science and SUNY Center for
Environmental Health and Medicine, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY,
USA.
(8)Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
(9)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.
(10)Departments of Vector Biology and Clinical Sciences, Liverpool School of
Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
(11)Departments of Vector Biology and Tropical Disease Biology, Centre for
Neglected Tropical Disease, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
grant.hughes@lstmed.ac.uk.

How microbe-microbe interactions dictate microbial complexity in the mosquito gut
is unclear. Previously we found that, Serratia, a gut symbiont that alters vector
competence and is being considered for vector control, poorly colonized Aedes
aegypti yet was abundant in Culex quinquefasciatus reared under identical
conditions. To investigate the incompatibility between Serratia and Ae. aegypti, 
we characterized two distinct strains of Serratia marcescens from Cx.
quinquefasciatus and examined their ability to infect Ae. aegypti. Both Serratia 
strains poorly infected Ae. aegypti, but when microbiome homeostasis was
disrupted, the prevalence and titers of Serratia were similar to the infection in
its native host. Examination of multiple genetically diverse Ae. aegypti lines
found microbial interference to S. marcescens was commonplace, however, one line 
of Ae. aegypti was susceptible to infection. Microbiome analysis of resistant and
susceptible lines indicated an inverse correlation between Enterobacteriaceae
bacteria and Serratia, and experimental co-infections in a gnotobiotic system
recapitulated the interference phenotype. Furthermore, we observed an effect on
host behavior; Serratia exposure to Ae. aegypti disrupted their feeding behavior,
and this phenotype was also reliant on interactions with their native microbiota.
Our work highlights the complexity of host-microbe interactions and provides
evidence that microbial interactions influence mosquito behavior.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-020-00763-3 
PMID: 32895494 

