
1. Ci Ji Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2019 Jun 13;32(2):162-166. doi: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_69_19.
eCollection 2020 Apr-Jun.

Genomic investigation of emerging zoonotic pathogen Shewanella xiamenensis.

Wang JH(1)(2), Tseng SY(3), Tung KC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Tzu 
Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical Foundation, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.

Objective: Shewanella xiamenensis is an emerging zoonotic pathogen commonly found
in aquatic ecosystem. Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR) and (CRISPR)-associated gene systems act as adaptive immune system of
prokaryotes. Recently, growing evidence suggested their role in bacterial
virulence and resistance. Despite its medical importance, little is known about
the genomic characteristics of S. xiamenensis.
Materials and Methods: Strain ZYW6 was isolated from Epinephelus awoara. We
sequenced the 16S rRNA gene and blast against the GenBank bacterial database.
Antibiotic susceptibility tests and interpretation were performed by automatic
VITEK 2 system. We extracted the genomic DNA with QIAGEN Genomic-tip 100/G kit
and QIAGEN Genomic DNA Buffer Set. Whole-genome shotgun sequencing was performed 
using the Illumina MiSeq sequencer. To identify the CRISPR-Cas System in the
genome of S. xiamenensis ZYW6, the Integrated Microbial Genomes and Microbiomes
and CRISPRFinder were used.
Results: We characterized the genome of a S. xiamenensis strain. The genome is
4,765,190 bp in length and encodes 4262 open-reading frames. Type I CRISPR-Cas
system and serine biosynthesis genes were identified.
Conclusion: Our results demonstrate the genetic structure of CRISPR-Cas system,
l-serine synthesis, and oxacillinase in S. xiamenensis. The report of antibiotics
resistance genes in the study might indicate a possible reservoir of
antimicrobial drug resistance determinants in food animal, resulting in potential
infection source. The findings provide insights into the structure and
composition of CRISPR-Cas system in S. xiamenensis and foundation for future
biological validation.

Copyright: © 2019 Tzu Chi Medical Journal.

DOI: 10.4103/tcmj.tcmj_69_19 
PMCID: PMC7137373
PMID: 32269948 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.

