
1. J Hazard Mater. 2020 Apr 5;387:122018. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122018. Epub
2020 Jan 3.

Function of c-type cytochromes of Shewanella xiamenensis in enhanced anaerobic
bioreduction of Cr(VI) by graphene oxide and graphene oxide/polyvinyl alcohol
films.

Li Y(1), Chen Z(2), Shi Y(1), Luo Q(1), Wang Y(1), Wang H(3), Peng Y(1), Wang
H(1), He N(1), Wang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, PR China.
(2)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tan Kah Kee College, Xiamen
University, Zhangzhou, PR China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Watershed 
Science and Health, School of Public Health and Management, Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, PR China; Fujian Provincial Key Lab of Coastal Basin
Environment, Fujian Polytechnic Normal University, Fuqing, PR China. Electronic
address: chenzheng_new@163.com.
(3)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tan Kah Kee College, Xiamen
University, Zhangzhou, PR China.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen, PR China. Electronic address:
wypp@xmu.edu.cn.

Graphene-based materials have been demonstrated to facilitate electron
extracellular transfer (EET) of Shewanella. In this study, compared to group
lacking graphene oxide (GO)-based materials, GO films-added group and graphene
oxide/polyvinyl alcohol (GO/PVA) film-added group delivered 2.67- and 3.13-fold
increases in the Cr(VI) reduction by Shewanella xiamenensis, respectively. The
whole reduction process could be divided into three stages, including microbial
Cr(VI) reduction and GO reduction stage, microbial GO reduction stage and
microbial Cr(VI) reduction mediated by reduced graphene oxide (rGO) stage.
Moreover, gene analysis revealed that addition of GO and GO/PVA films stimulated 
overexpression of several c-type cytochrome (c-Cyts) genes, including mtrA, mtrB,
mtrC, mtrD, mtrE, mtrF, omcA, petC and SO-4047. Specifically, appreciable Cr(VI) 
reduction by the strains that overexpressed mtrA, mtrB, mtrC, mtrD, mtrE, mtrF
and omcA further confirmed that overexpression of c-Cyts genes indeed enhanced
the efficiency of Cr(VI) reduction. Based on these results, the specific function
of every c-Cyt was clearly found in Cr(VI) reduction by the induction of GO-based
materials. Our finding has disclosed a synergetic mechanism stimulated by
GO-based materials to enhance Cr(VI) bioreduction that was not only mediated
through the modification of material but also upregulated the expression of
functional genes.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.122018 
PMID: 31927260 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

