
1. PeerJ. 2020 Sep 15;8:e9553. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9553. eCollection 2020.

Interdependency of regulatory effects of iron and riboflavin in the foodborne
pathogen Shigella flexneri determined by integral transcriptomics.

Lozano Aguirre LF(1), Salazar JC(2), Vásquez JI(3), García-Angulo VA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Análisis Bioinformáticos, Centro de Ciencias Genómicas, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Morelos, México.
(2)Programa de Microbiología y Micología, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas,
Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John,
Canada.

Shigella flexneri is the causative agent of dysentery. For pathogens, iron is a
critical micronutrient as its bioavailability is usually low in bacterial niches.
This metal is involved in critical physiological processes mainly as a component 
of important metabolic molecules involved in redox reactions. Usually bacteria
respond to fluctuations in iron availability to regulate iron acquisition and
other iron-related functions. Recently the close metabolic feedback between iron 
and riboflavin, another pivotal biological redox agent, began to draw attention
in bacteria. This is a widespread biological phenomenon, partly characterized by 
the coordination of regulatory responses to iron and riboflavin, probably owed to
the involvement of these cofactors in common processes. Nonetheless, no
systematic analyses to determine the extent of this regulatory effect have been
performed in any species. Here, the transcriptomics responses to iron,
riboflavin, iron in the presence of riboflavin and riboflavin in the presence of 
iron were assessed and compared in S. flexneri. The riboflavin regulon had a 43% 
overlap with the iron regulon. Notably, the presence of riboflavin highly
increased the number of iron-responsive genes. Reciprocally, iron drastically
changed the pool of riboflavin-responsive genes. Gene ontology (GO) functional
terms enrichment analysis showed that biological processes were distinctively
enriched for each subgroup of responsive genes. Among the biological processes
regulated by iron and riboflavin were iron uptake, amino acids metabolism and
electron transfer for ATP synthesis. Thus, iron and riboflavin highly affect the 
transcriptomics responses induced by each other in S. flexneri. GO terms analysis
suggests that iron and riboflavin coordinately regulate specific physiological
functions involving redox metabolism.

©2020 Lozano Aguirre et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9553 
PMCID: PMC7500357
PMID: 32983629 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing
interests.

