
1. Saudi J Biol Sci. 2020 Sep;27(9):2261-2268. doi: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.06.047. Epub
2020 Jul 2.

In vitro antibacterial activities of methanol and aqueous leave extracts of
selected medicinal plants against human pathogenic bacteria.

Ibrahim N(1), Kebede A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bonga University, Bonga, Ethiopia.
(2)School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Haramaya University, P.O. Box
138, Dire Dawa, Ethiopia.

People use medicinal plants as diet, and for treatment of infectious and
noninfectious diseases and they use brief procedures like frying and cooking to
do so. Medicinal plants; Moringa oleifera, Azadirachta indica, and Lepidium
sativum which is believed to have active components that help to treat and manage
various diseases were investigated for their antibacterial activities against
Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella Typhi, Streptococcus agalactiae and Shigella
boydii. Solvent methanol and aqueous were used for extraction of crudes by means 
of maceration. Susceptibility testing was determined by using disc diffusion
method and Minimum inhibitory concentration was determined by broth dilution
method. Heat treated plant material activity against test pathogen was aimed to
identify resistance capacity of plant material at different interval of time and 
temperature. All plant extracts under study was active against all tested
pathogen after exposure to 45 °C for 30 min. The antibacterial activities of the 
non-heat-treated extracts of Azadirachta indica were relatively low; the results 
of this study show that extracts of Azadirachta indica have better residual
antibacterial activities. Methanol extracts of all plant leaves showed highest
activity as compared to the aqueous extracts. This is probably assigning the
choice of extraction solvent for extracting desired active phytochemical from
plants. Many of the people in the study area were illiterate and they did not
have awareness about the ways use of medicinal plants. They use the medicinal
plants by cooking and frying for different purposes. In the main, plant material 
can be affected as the temperature of treatment is increases with respect to
various times of exposures.

© 2020 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2020.06.047 
PMCID: PMC7451613
PMID: 32874120 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

