
1. Food Sci Nutr. 2020 May 27;8(7):3128-3137. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.1544. eCollection
2020 Jul.

The efficacy of edible film from Konjac glucomannan and saffron petal extract to 
improve shelf life of fresh-cut cucumber.

Hashemi SMB(1), Jafarpour D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology Faculty of Agriculture Fasa
University Fasa Iran.
(2)Department of Food Science and Technology College of Agriculture Islamic Azad 
University of Fasa Branch Fars Iran.

The efficacy of saffron petal extract (SPE; 1%-4%) incorporated into Konjac
glucomannan (KGM) edible films on the quality and shelf life of fresh-cut
cucumbers was evaluated. Changes in chemical, physical, and microbial properties,
antioxidant activity, and total soluble phenolic contents of sliced cucumbers
during storage at 4°C for 5 days were investigated. Results showed that the
addition of SPE markedly reduced the water vapor permeability features of
produced films, whereas the moisture content and transparency of them increased
(p < .05). All the formulated films containing 1%-4% of SPE exhibited significant
antimicrobial properties against the examined pathogens (Escherichia coli,
Shigella sonnei, Salmonella Typhi, Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus cereus)
both in vitro and in vivo conditions. KGM films incorporated SPE were successful 
in reducing mesophilic bacteria and fungi populations so that the microbial load 
significantly decreased as the concentrations of SPE increased and KGM + 4% of
SPE was considered as the most effective treatment in decreasing the microbial
content of sliced cucumbers. Total soluble solids of the treated cucumbers were
significantly increased at the end of the storage in refrigerator, compared to
the control sample. Moreover, antioxidant activity (DPPH assay) and total soluble
phenols in treated fruit increased with storage time, while these parameters
decreased with increasing concentrations of SPE incorporated into KGM film. So
according to the findings, the introduced film with KGM and SPE could be
considered as an edible film and be applied to preserve the fruit and vegetables 
quality and extend the shelf life of sliced cucumbers.

© 2020 The Authors. Food Science & Nutrition published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/fsn3.1544 
PMCID: PMC7382154
PMID: 32724577 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of
interest concerning the research, authorship, and publication of this article.

