
1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2020 Summer;13(3):238-246.

Epidemiological patterns and antimicrobial resistance of bacterial diarrhea among
children in Nairobi City, Kenya.

Webale MK(1), Wanjala C(2), Guyah B(3), Shaviya N(2), Munyekenye GO(1), Nyanga
PL(4), Marwa IN(1), Kagoiyo S(1), Wangai LN(1), Webale SK(3), Kamau K(1),
Kitungulu N(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, Kirinyaga University, Kutus, Kenya.
(2)School of Public Health, Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Masinde Muliro
University of Science and Technology, Kakamega, Kenya.
(3)School of Public Health, Biomedical Sciences and Technology, Maseno
University, Maseno, Kenya.
(4)Disease Surveillance and Response Unit, Ministry of Health, Nairobi City,
Kenya.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, Masinde Muliro University of Science and
Technology, Kakamega, Kenya.

Aim: Determine the prevalence of enteric bacterial pathogens and their
antimicrobial resistance among diarrheic children in Nairobi City, Kenya.
Background: Regardless of enteric bacterial pathogens being a major cause of
gastroenteritis in children, their occurrence and antimicrobial resistance
patterns reveals regional spatial and temporal variation.
Methods: In a cross-sectional study, a total of 374 children below five years
presenting with diarrhea at Mbagathi County Hospital were recruited. Stool
microbiology test was used to detect enteric bacterial infection. Antimicrobial
resistance was determined using the disk diffusion method.
Results: Diarrheagenic E. coli (36.4%) was the leading species followed by
Shigella (3.2%), Salmonella (2.4%), Campylobacter (1.6%), Yersinia (1.3%) and
Aeromonas (1.1%) species. Escherichia coli pathotyping revealed that 20.9%, 4.0%,
10.2% and 0.5% of the study participants were infected with enteroaggregative E. 
coli (EAEC), enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) and 
enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC) pure isolates while the prevalence of mixed
pathotype infections was 0.3% for EAEC/EPEC/ETEC and 0.5% for EAEC/ETEC. Shigella
sero-grouping revealed that 0.5%, 0.3%, 1.9%, and 0.5% were infected with
Shigella boydii, Shigella dysentriae, Shigella flexneri and Shigella sonnei pure 
isolates. Shigella species and E. coli co-infection was detected in 2.4% of the
children, specifically, 1.1% for EAEC/Shigella boydii, 0.5% for EAEC/Shigella
dysentriae and 0.3% in each case of EAEC/Shigella sonnei, EPEC/Shigella flexneri 
and ETEC/Shigella flexneri co-infections. Most of the isolates were resistant to 
commonly prescribed antibiotics.
Conclusion: There was a high prevalence of enteric bacterial pathogens and
co-infection alters epidemiological dynamics of bacterial diarrhea in children.
Continuous antibiotic resistance surveillance is justified because the pathogens 
were highly resistant to commonly prescribed antimicrobials.

©2020 RIGLD, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases.


PMCID: PMC7417493
PMID: 32821354 

