
1. Methods Protoc. 2020 Aug 31;3(3). pii: E62. doi: 10.3390/mps3030062.

Characterization of Competitive ELISA and Formulated Alhydrogel Competitive ELISA
(FAcE) for Direct Quantification of Active Ingredients in GMMA-Based Vaccines.

Rossi O(1), Aruta MG(1), Acquaviva A(1), Mancini F(1), Micoli F(1), Necchi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)GSK Vaccines Institute for Global Health s.r.l (GVGH), 53100 Siena, Italy.

Generalized modules for membrane antigens (GMMA) represent a technology
particularly attractive for designing affordable vaccines against Gram-negative
bacteria. We explored such technology for the development of O-antigen-based
vaccines against Shigella and nontyphoidal Salmonella. Adsorption of GMMA on
Alhydrogel was required for abrogation of pyrogenicity in rabbits, and Shigella
sonnei GMMA on Alhydrogel was well tolerated and immunogenic in humans.
Quantification of key antigens in formulated vaccines was fundamental for release
and to check stability overtime. Traditionally, the direct quantification of
antigens adsorbed on aluminum salts has been challenging, and the quantification 
of each active ingredient in multicomponent formulated vaccines has been even
more complicated. To directly quantify each active ingredient and unbound drug
substances in formulated vaccines, we developed the Formulated Alhydrogel
competitive ELISA (FAcE) and the competitive ELISA method, respectively. The
methods were both fully characterized, assessing specificity, repeatability,
intermediate precision, and accuracy, for S. sonnei OAg quantification, both in a
single component or multicomponent GMMA formulation also containing S. flexneri
GMMA. The developed immunological methods allowed us to fully characterize
Shigella GMMA drug products, supporting their preclinical and clinical
development. The same methods, already extended to GMMA from nontyphoidal
Salmonella and Neisseria meningitidis, could be potentially extended to any
antigen formulated on Alhydrogel.

DOI: 10.3390/mps3030062 
PMID: 32878036 

