
1. Indian Pediatr. 2020 Aug 9. pii: S097475591600225. [Epub ahead of print]

Factors Associated With Mortality in Toxic Encephalopathy Due to Shigellosis in
Children.

Jayakrishnan MP(1), Geeta MG(2), Krishnakumar P(3), Gireeshan VK(2), George B(4),
Prathiksha P(5), Arunkumar G(5), Anitha PM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Government Medical College, Kozhikode, Kerala,
India. Correspondence to: Dr Machinary Puthenpurayil Jayakrishnan, Additional
Professor of Pediatrics, Government Medical College, Kozhikode, Kerala, India.
mp.jayakrishnan@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Government Medical College, Kozhikode, Kerala,
India.
(3)Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (IMHANS), Kozhikode, Kerala,
India.
(4)Department of Community Medicine, Government Medical College, Kozhikode,
Kerala, India.
(5)Manipal Institute of Virology, Manipal Academy of Higher Education (Deemed to 
be University), Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Government Medical College, Kozhikode, Kerala,
India.

BACKGROUND: There are no reports on factors associated with mortality in Shigella
encephalopathy from India.
OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical characteristics and factors associated with
mortality among children with Shigella encephalopathy.
METHODS: The data collection was done prospectively from January, 2018 to May,
2019 with retrospective data from June, 2016 to December, 2017.
PARTICIPANTS: The study cohort consisted of 58 children <12 years of age with
Shigella encephalopathy admitted to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit.
METHODS: Shigella encephalopathy was confirmed if culture or real time Polymerase
Chain Reaction (PCR) of a stool sample or rectal swab was positive, with temporal
association of diarrhea with seizures, altered sensorium or both. Association of 
mortality with risk factors was tested using chi square test, and the strength of
association was estimated in terms of relative risk (RR) and 95% CI.
RESULTS: Seizures and altered sensorium were the predominant neurological
symptoms. Shock occurred in 32 (55%) children, while blood in stools was a
feature in only 6 (10%) children. S.sonnei was the commonest species identified
on stool culture (19;33%). On univariate analysis, prolonged seizures, shock,
prolonged altered sensorium, multi - organ dysfunction, lymphocytopenia at
admission and need for mechanical ventilation were significantly associated with 
mortality. On multivariate regression, delayed presentation (presentation to the 
hospital 48 hours after the onset of symptoms) and prolonged altered sensorium
(>12 hours) were found to be independently associated with mortality.
CONCLUSION: Recognition of factors associated with mortality in Shigella
encephalopathy may assist in better monitoring of sicker children and improved
outcomes.


PMID: 32788427 

