
1. mSphere. 2020 Sep 23;5(5). pii: e00416-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00416-20.

Establishment of a Controlled Human Infection Model with a Lyophilized Strain of 
Shigella sonnei 53G.

Frenck RW Jr(1)(2), Dickey M(3)(2), Suvarnapunya AE(4), Chandrasekaran L(4),
Kaminski RW(4), Clarkson KA(4), McNeal M(3)(2), Lynen A(5), Parker S(2), Hoeper
A(2), Mani S(6), Fix A(6), Maier N(6), Venkatesan MM(4), Porter CK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA robert.frenck@cchmc.org.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(4)Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(5)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(6)PATH, Washington, DC, USA.

Controlled human infection models (CHIMs) are useful for vaccine development. To 
improve on existing models, we developed a CHIM using a lyophilized preparation
of Shigella sonnei strain 53G produced using current good manufacturing practice 
(cGMP). Healthy adults were enrolled in an open-label dose-ranging study.
Following administration of a dose of rehydrated S. sonnei strain 53G, subjects
were monitored for development of disease. The first cohort received 500 CFU of
53G, and dosing of subsequent cohorts was based on results from the previous
cohort. Subjects were administered ciprofloxacin on day 5 and discharged home on 
day 8. Subjects returned as outpatients for clinical checks and sample
collection. Attack rates increased as the dose of S. sonnei was increased. Among 
those receiving the highest dose (1,760 CFU), 70% developed moderate to severe
diarrhea, 50% had dysentery, and 40% had fever. Antilipopolysaccharide responses 
were observed across all cohorts. An S. sonnei CHIM using a lyophilized lot of
strain 53G was established. A dose in the range of 1,500 to 2,000 CFU of 53G was 
selected as the dose for future challenge studies using this product. This model 
will enable direct comparison of study results between institutions and ensure
better consistency over time in the challenge inoculum.IMPORTANCE Controlled
human infection models (CHIMs) are invaluable tools utilized to understand the
human response to infection, potentially leading to protective immune mechanisms 
and allowing efficacy testing of enteric countermeasures, including vaccines,
antibiotics, and other products. The development of an improved Shigella CHIM for
both Shigella sonnei and Shigella flexneri is consistent with international
efforts, supported by international donors and the World Health Organization,
focused on standardizing Shigella CHIMs and using them to accelerate Shigella
vaccine development. The use of lyophilized Shigella challenge strains rather
than plate-grown inoculum preparations is considered an important step forward in
the standardization process. Furthermore, the results of studies such as this
justify the development of lyophilized preparations for additional
epidemiologically important S. flexneri serotypes, including S. flexneri 3a and
S. flexneri 6.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00416-20 
PMID: 32968005 

