
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Aug 31;16(8):e1008822. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008822.
eCollection 2020 Aug.

Shigella hijacks the exocyst to cluster macropinosomes for efficient vacuolar
escape.

Chang YY(1), Stévenin V(1), Duchateau M(2), Giai Gianetto Q(2)(3), Hourdel V(2), 
Rodrigues CD(1), Matondo M(2), Reiling N(4)(5), Enninga J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dynamics of Host-Pathogen Interactions Unit and CNRS UMR3691, Institut
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(2)Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit, Proteomics Platform, Institut Pasteur, USR
CNRS, Paris, France.
(3)Hub Bioinformatics et Biostatistics, Computational Biology Department, USR
CNRS, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Microbial Interface Biology, Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center,
Borstel, Germany.
(5)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner site
Hamburg-Lübeck-Borstel, Borstel, Germany.

Shigella flexneri invades host cells by entering within a bacteria-containing
vacuole (BCV). In order to establish its niche in the host cytosol, the bacterium
ruptures its BCV. Contacts between S. flexneri BCV and infection-associated
macropinosomes (IAMs) formed in situ have been reported to enhance BCV
disintegration. The mechanism underlying S. flexneri vacuolar escape remains
however obscure. To decipher the molecular mechanism priming the communication
between the IAMs and S. flexneri BCV, we performed mass spectrometry-based
analysis of the magnetically purified IAMs from S. flexneri-infected cells. While
proteins involved in host recycling and exocytic pathways were significantly
enriched at the IAMs, we demonstrate more precisely that the S. flexneri type III
effector protein IpgD mediates the recruitment of the exocyst to the IAMs through
the Rab8/Rab11 pathway. This recruitment results in IAM clustering around S.
flexneri BCV. More importantly, we reveal that IAM clustering subsequently
facilitates an IAM-mediated unwrapping of the ruptured vacuole membranes from S. 
flexneri, enabling the naked bacterium to be ready for intercellular spread via
actin-based motility. Taken together, our work untangles the molecular cascade of
S. flexneri-driven host trafficking subversion at IAMs to develop its cytosolic
lifestyle, a crucial step en route for infection progression at cellular and
tissue level.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008822 
PMCID: PMC7485983
PMID: 32866204 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

