
1. mSphere. 2020 Sep 23;5(5). pii: e00988-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00988-19.

Immune Response Characterization after Controlled Infection with Lyophilized
Shigella sonnei 53G.

Clarkson KA(1), Frenck RW Jr(2), Dickey M(2), Suvarnapunya AE(1), Chandrasekaran 
L(1), Weerts HP(1), Heaney CD(3), McNeal M(2), Detizio K(4), Parker S(2), Hoeper 
A(2), Bourgeois AL(5), Porter CK(4), Venkatesan MM(1), Kaminski RW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Enteric Infections, Bacterial Diseases Branch, Walter Reed Army 
Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(2)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Naval Medical Research Center, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(5)PATH, Washington, DC, USA.
(6)Department of Enteric Infections, Bacterial Diseases Branch, Walter Reed Army 
Institute of Research, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA
Robert.W.Kaminski.civ@mail.mil.

Shigella is a major cause of moderate to severe diarrhea largely affecting
children (<5 years old) living in low- and middle-income countries. Several
vaccine candidates are in development, and controlled human infection models
(CHIMs) can be useful tools to provide an early assessment of vaccine efficacy
and potentially support licensure. A lyophilized strain of S. sonnei 53G was
manufactured and evaluated to establish a dose that safely and reproducibly
induced a ≥60% attack rate. Samples were collected pre- and postchallenge to
assess intestinal inflammatory responses, antigen-specific serum and mucosal
antibody responses, functional antibody responses, and memory B cell responses.
Infection with S. sonnei 53G induced a robust intestinal inflammatory response as
well as antigen-specific antibodies in serum and mucosal secretions and
antigen-specific IgA- and IgG-secreting B cells positive for the α4β7 gut-homing 
marker. There was no association between clinical disease outcomes and systemic
or functional antibody responses postchallenge; however, higher
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-specific serum IgA- and IgA-secreting memory B cell
responses were associated with a reduced risk of disease postchallenge. This
study provides unique insights into the immune responses pre- and postinfection
with S. sonnei 53G in a CHIM, which could help guide the rational design of
future vaccines to induce protective immune responses more analogous to those
triggered by infection.IMPORTANCE Correlate(s) of immunity have yet to be defined
for shigellosis. As previous disease protects against subsequent infection in a
serotype-specific manner, investigating immune response profiles pre- and
postinfection provides an opportunity to identify immune markers potentially
associated with the development of protective immunity and/or with a reduced risk
of developing shigellosis postchallenge. This study is the first to report such
an extensive characterization of the immune response after challenge with S.
sonnei 53G. Results demonstrate an association of progression to shigellosis with
robust intestinal inflammatory and mucosal gut-homing responses. An important
finding in this study was the association of elevated Shigella LPS-specific serum
IgA and memory B cell IgA responses at baseline with reduced risk of disease. The
increased baseline IgA responses may contribute to the lack of dose response
observed in the study and suggests that IgA responses should be further
investigated as potential correlates of immunity.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00988-19 
PMID: 32968012 

