
1. J Breath Res. 2020 Jul 3;14(3):036005. doi: 10.1088/1752-7163/ab944d.

Effects of academic stress on the levels of oral volatile sulfur compounds,
halitosis-related bacteria and stress biomarkers of healthy female undergraduate 
students.

De Lima PO(1), Nani BD, Rolim GS, Groppo FC, Franz-Montan M, Alves De Moraes AB, 
Cogo-Müller K, Marcondes FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Piracicaba Dental School, University of Campinas,
Piracicaba, SP, Brazil. These authors contributed equally to this work.

To investigate whether academic stress changes the salivary microbiota and its
relationship with salivary parameters, evaluating the effects on the production
of volatile sulfur compounds (VSCs) in healthy women. Fifty-five women who were
enrolled in a four-year Dentistry course were assessed for academic stress by the
questionnaire Maslach Burnout Inventory-Student Survey and were then classified
into 'Not Stressed' and 'Stressed' groups. Cortisol and alpha-amylase (AA) were
measured as physiological stress biomarkers. Oral Chroma™ gas chromatograph was
used to measure concentrations of hydrogen sulfide (H2S), methyl mercaptan and
dimethyl sulfide. Salivary proteins were evaluated by western blot. Quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction was used to identify the salivary amounts of
halitosis-associated bacteria. The 'Stressed' volunteers showed higher levels of 
H2S, AA, Fusobacterium nucleatum and total bacteria, compared to the 'Not
Stressed' individuals (p < 0.05; Mann-Whitney test). Salivary proteins showed no 
differences between groups (p > 0.05; Mann-Whitney test). Academic stress was
positively correlated with H2S, total bacteria and F. nucleatum counts, while F. 
nucleatum was positively correlated with AA. H2S showed positive correlations
with AA and Solobacterium moorei (p < 0.05; Spearman correlation). Beta-defensin 
(BD) presented negative correlations with H2S and S. moorei (p < 0.05; Spearman
correlation). Academic stress increased salivary F. nucleatum and total bacteria,
as well as AA activity. The protein BD showed important correlations with
bacteria and VSC. These changes appeared to be accountable for increased H2S
production in the stressed women.

DOI: 10.1088/1752-7163/ab944d 
PMID: 32428892 

