
1. Oral Health Prev Dent. 2020 Jun 8;18(3):625-632. doi: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a44938.

In Vitro Antibacterial Effectiveness of a Naturopathic Oral Care Product on Oral 
Pathogens.

Beyer A, Dalton M, Doll K, Winkel A, Stumpp NS, Stiesch M.

PURPOSE: Currently, the prevention of periodontal diseases focuses on mechanical 
removal of pathogenic biofilms combined with oral antiseptics as supportive
chemical antibacterial control. Due to the risk of resistance development and
side effects of existing antiseptics, the interest in alternative medicine with
naturopathic treatment modalities is growing in dentistry. In the present study, 
the antibacterial effect of the naturopathic oral care product Repha OS and some 
of its derivatives, based on medicinal plant extracts and essential oils, with a 
specific focus on added sweeteners, was investigated on periodontal pathogenic
and halitosis-associated bacteria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antibacterial efficacy was investigated by agar
dilution assay. The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for the bacterial
species Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, Fusobacterium nucleatum,
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Prevotella intermedia and Solobacterium moorei was
determined.
RESULTS: A concentration-dependent antibacterial effect on oral bacterial species
by Repha OS and its derivatives was demonstrated. For the original product, the
maximum MIC was 10% of the calculated test solution concentration in agar for all
examined bacterial species. The removal of essential oils reduced the
antibacterial efficacy, whereas the displacement or replacement of sweeteners had
almost no effect.
CONCLUSION: In addition to other individual effects of the ingredients, the
results of this study show that an antibacterial effect of the naturopathic oral 
care product on the tested oral bacterial species was achieved in vitro. In vivo,
the combination of this antibacterial effect with other properties of the various
ingredients may be interesting for a holistic approach in preventive dentistry.

DOI: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a44938 
PMID: 32700516  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

