
1. Anaerobe. 2020 Oct;65:102241. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102241. Epub 2020 Aug 
7.

Six cases of Solobacterium moorei isolated alone or in mixed culture in Hungary
and comparison with previously published cases.

Sárvári KP(1), Sántha D(2), Kovács R(3), Körmöndi S(4), Pető Z(5), Vereb T(6),
Sztanó B(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Microbiology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
Electronic address: sarvari.karoly.peter@med.u-szeged.hu.
(2)Department of Oncotherapy, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged,
Hungary.
(4)Department of Traumatology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.
(6)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Szeged, Szeged,
Hungary.
(7)Department of Oto-Rhino-Laryngology and Head-Neck Surgery, University of
Szeged, Szeged, Hungary.

Solobacterium moorei is a strict anaerobic gram-positive rod. It is found in the 
human microbiota in different parts of the body, but it also appears to be an
opportunistic pathogen in some infectious processes. We describe six cases of
severe infections identified in 2016 in which S. moorei was isolated alone or in 
mixed culture involving other anaerobes or both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria.
Three cases were associated with the oral cavity, including a middle ear
infection, a wound infection after total laryngectomy, and a mandibular abscess
as a result of bisphosphonate therapy. In the other three patients, the sites of 
infection had no connections with the oral cavity and included chronic
osteomyelitis of the tibia, a superinfection of cutaneous tuberculosis associated
with hidradenitis suppurativa, and the isolation of S. moorei from the blood
culture of a cachectic man with several comorbidities. Based on our findings,
S. moorei does not appear to be that virulent of a bacterium; except for the case
with bacteraemia, S. moorei was recovered as a co-pathogen in patients with
several immunosuppressive predisposing factors. We highlight the finding that the
routine use of MALDI-TOF MS in microbiology laboratories can in a timely and
detailed manner identify members of mixed infections involving different
anaerobic bacteria that may be rare and difficult-to-culture and identify
species, such as S. moorei.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102241 
PMID: 32777291 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest to disclose, monetary or otherwise.

