
1. Chemosphere. 2019 Dec;237:124514. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124514. Epub
2019 Aug 5.

Isolation and characterization of novel bacterial strains for integrated
solar-bioelectrokinetic of soil contaminated with heavy petroleum hydrocarbons.

Hassan IA(1), Mohamedelhassan EE(2), Yanful EK(3), Weselowski B(4), Yuan ZC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Taibah University, Al
Medina, Saudi Arabia; London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada, London, Canada. Electronic address: imohammed@taibahu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Civil Engineering, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Canada.
Electronic address: eltayeb@lakeheadu.ca.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Western University, London,
Canada.
(4)London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,
London, Canada.
(5)London Research and Development Centre, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada,
London, Canada; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Western University,
London, Canada.

This study investigated the isolation and characterization of three novel
bacterial strains; Acinetobacter calcoaceticus, Sphingobacterium multivorum, and 
Sinorhizobium, isolated form agriculture land. From three hundred strains of
bacteria, the three isolates were identified for their superior diesel
degradation ability by a series of bench-scale tests. The isolates were further
investigated in bench tests for their ability to grow in different diesel fuel
concentrations, temperature and pH; degrade diesel fuel in vitro; and for the
identification of functional genes. Semi-pilot bioelectrokinetic tests were
conducted in three electrokinetic cells. An innovative electrode configuration
was adopted to stabilize the soil pH and water content during the test. The genes
expressed in the diesel degradation process including Lipases enzymes Lip A,
LipB, Alk-b2, rubA, P450, and 1698/2041 were detected in the three isolates. The 
results showed that the solar panel voltage output is in agreement with the
trapezoid model. The temperatures in the cells were found to be 5-7 °C higher
than the ambient temperature. The electrode configuration succeeded in
stabilizing the soil pH and water content, preventing the development of a pH
gradient, important progress for the survival of bacteria. The diesel degradation
in the soil after bioelectrokinetic tests were 20-30%, compared to 10-12% in the 
controls. The study succeeded in developing environmentally friendly technology
employing novel bacterial strains to degrade diesel fuel and utilizing solar
panels to produce renewable energy for bioelectrokinetics during the winter
season.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2019.124514 
PMID: 31408796  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

