
1. Microbiology (Reading). 2020 Aug;166(8):727-734. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.000940. Epub 
2020 Jun 10.

Staphylococcus nepalensis, a commensal of the oral microbiota of domestic cats,
is a reservoir of transferrable antimicrobial resistance.

Andrade-Oliveira AL(1), Rossi CC(1), Souza-Silva T(1), Giambiagi-deMarval M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiologia Paulo de Góes, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Staphylococcus nepalensis is a commensal bacterium from the oral microbiota of
domestic cats, with a still obscure clinical importance. In this work, we
analysed the ability of feline strains of S. nepalensis to transfer antimicrobial
resistance genes to Staphylococcus aureus isolated from humans through plasmids. 
To this end, we first analysed all publicly available genomes from cat
staphylococci using computational methods to build a pan-resistome. Genes that
encode resistance to erythromycin, gentamicin, mupirocin and tetracycline, common
to human and cat staphylococci and previously described to be located in mobile
genetic elements, were chosen for the next analyses. We studied 15 strains of S. 
nepalensis, which were shown to be genetically different by GTG5-PCR. As observed
by disc diffusion, resistance to tetracycline was widespread (80 %), followed by 
resistance to erythromycin (40 %), gentamicin (27 %) and mupirocin (7 %). The
strains were positive for several antimicrobial resistance genes and more than
half of them harboured plasmids. The loss of plasmids and resistance genes in
some strains were induced by stress with SDS. Through conjugation experiments, we
observed that these plasmids can be transferred to S. aureus, thus increasing its
potential to resist drug therapy. Our findings show that S. nepalensis, an
underestimated inhabitant of the cat microbiota, can be a reservoir of
antimicrobial resistance genes for S. aureus and, like many other staphylococci, 
be an overlooked and silent threat to their animal hosts and humans living with
them.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.000940 
PMID: 32520697 

