
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Aug 1. doi: 10.1111/jam.14799. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel luminescent affiprobes for molecular detection of Staphylococcus aureus
using flow cytometry.

Shakeran Z(1), Javadi-Zarnaghi F(1), Emamzadeh R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology, Faculty of Biological
Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)NanoBioPhotonics Lab, Department of Biological Engineering, Utah State
University, Utah, United States.

AIMS: Diagnosis of Staphylococcus aureus is important in various diseases from
hospital-acquired infections to foodborne diseases. This work reports two new
luminescent affiprobes for specific detection of S. aureus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: To develop advanced luminescent affiprobes, enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) was flanked by single and double repeats of ZpA963
affibody using molecular biology studies. The recombinant proteins including
fluorescent monomeric affibody (fA1 ) and fluorescent dimeric affibody (fA2 )
were expressed in the bacterial expression system, purified and used to identify 
the S. aureus. Fluorescence microscope and flow cytometry results demonstrated
that the treated samples with fA1 and fA2 had relatively high fluorescent mean
intensities in comparison to the untreated S. aureus cells. Moreover, it was
revealed that 'fA2 ' affiprobe had lower dissociation constant value (about
25-fold) and was more effective for detection of S. aureus than the 'fA1 '
affiprobe. In addition, the binding of the affiprobes for some other pathogenic
bacteria i.e. Escherichia coli, Bacillus cereus, Enterococcus faecalis and
Staphylococcus saprophyticus was examined. Expectedly, no cross-reaction was
observed for binding the constructed affiprobes to these bacteria, eliminating
possibilities for false positive results.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that 'fA1 ' affiprobe and 'fA2 ' affiprobe are two 
new efficient luminescent affiprobes for detecting S. aureus.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: We developed a new approach for detection
of Staphylococcus aureus in a simple one-step process and in low concentrations
of probes. In the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to direct
detection of bacterial cells by affiprobes and may be used to develop new
diagnostic kits.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14799 
PMID: 32738017 

