
1. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Jul 15. pii: ciaa998. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa998. [Epub ahead
of print]

Methanobrevibacter smithii archaemia in febrile patients with bacteremia,
including those with endocarditis.

Drancourt M(1), Djemai K(1)(2), Gouriet F(1), Grine G(1)(2), Loukil A(1), Bedotto
M(1), Levasseur A(1), Lepidi H(1), Bou-Khalil J(2), Khelaifia S(2), Raoult D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Univ., IRD, MEPHI, IHU Méditerranée Infection, Marseille,
France.
(2)IHU Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: The spectrum of infections caused by the emerging opportunistic
pathogens methanogens which escape routine detection remains to be described. To 
determine the prevalence of archaemia, we searched for methanogens in the blood
of febrile patients using specific tools.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective study at Institut Hospitalier Universitaire
Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, France, September 2018 - April 2020, enrolling
7,716 blood culture samples routinely collected in patients with fever. Blood
samples were screened by specific PCR assays for the presence of methanogens.
Positive samples were observed by autofluorescence and electron microscopy,
analyzed by metagenomics and cultured using previously developed methods. Blood
culture bottles experimentally inoculated were used as controls. The presence of 
methanogens in vascular and cardiac tissues was assessed by indirect
immunofluorescence, fluorescent in situ hybridization and PCR-based
investigations.
RESULTS: PCR detection attempted in 7,716 blood samples, was negative in all
1,312 aerobic bottles and 810 bacterial culture-negative anaerobic bottles. PCRs 
were positive in 27/5,594 (0.5%) bacterial culture-positive anaerobic bottles
that contained cultures collected from 26 patients. Sequencing confirmed
Methanobrevibacter smithii associated with staphylococci in 14 patients,
fermentative Enterobacteriaceae in nine patients and streptococci in three
patients. Metagenomics confirmed M. smithii in five blood samples, and M. smithii
was isolated via culture in broth from two samples; the genomes of these two
isolates were sequenced. Blood cultures experimentally inoculated with
Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus epidermidis or Staphylococcus hominis yielded 
hydrogen, but no methane, authentifying observational data.Three patients, all
diagnosed with infectious mitral endocarditis, were diagnosed by microscopy,
PCR-based detections and culture: we showed M. smithii microscopically and by a
specific PCR followed by sequencing method in two of three cardiovascular
tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Using appropriate methods of detection, M. smithii is demonstrated
as causing archaemia and endocarditis in febrile patients who are coinfected by
bacteria.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciaa998 
PMID: 32668457 

