
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 30:104555. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104555. [Epub
ahead of print]

Inhibition of quorum sensing-controlled virulence factors with natural substances
and novel protease, obtained from Halobacillus karajensis.

Ghoreishi FS(1), Roghanian R(2), Emtiazi G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology, Faculty of Biological
Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology & Microbiology, Faculty of Biological
Science and Technology, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address:
rasoul_roghanian@yahoo.co.uk.

INTRODUCTION: In recent years, a challenge in clinical treatment has developed
due to bacterial resistance to antibiotics. One of the new mechanisms against
infections is virulence factor inhibition. Many virulence factors are controlled 
by quorum sensing pathways such as biofilm formation and pyocyanin production.
The goal of the present study was to investigate the effect of an obligate
halophilic bacterial strain on Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus, 
due to its halo-tolerant substances and enzymes.
METHODS: The effect of Halobacillus karajensis on bacterial growth and production
of virulence factors was studied in this work. The obligate halophile cells and
supernatant fractions were extracted by the methanol/chloroform method and
characterized by Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, X-ray
diffraction (XRD), Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS), and zymography. 
The effects of these fractions were studied on biofilm formation in P. aeruginosa
and S. aureus as well as on pyocyanin production in P. aeruginosa. The effective 
protein in the fraction was analyzed by the SDS-PAGE method, and all protein
fragments were studied for pyocyanin inhibition.
RESULTS: The crude supernatant extract, MMS fraction, from H. karajensis was
effective for the biofilm reduction in S. aureus (74%) and P. aeruginosa (27%).
Two proteases in this fraction, which were recognized by zymography on skim milk,
were the probable causes for extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) hydrolysis 
in the biofilm matrix. Also, halide crystals and branched fatty acids,
12methyl-tetradecanoic acid, in the other fractions decreased the biofilm by 18% 
in S. aureus. The results showed that a new 25 kD protein, which was obtained
from MMS fraction, inhibited pyocyanin production by 60% in P. aeruginosa. The
zymogram and bioinformatics studies showed that this protein was a serine
alkaline metalloprotease and had an interaction with AHL molecules.
CONCLUSION: The inhibitory effects of the non-toxic natural substances and
proteases on biofilm formation and pyocyanin production, specifically the 25 kD
protease, are novel in this study and make them a good candidate for infected
wound healing and inhibiting the virulence factors.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104555 
PMID: 33010361 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There are no
conflicts of interest in this work.

