
1. Microb Pathog. 2019 Dec;137:103732. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103732. Epub 2019
Sep 7.

Subclinical mastitis in Lacaune sheep: Causative agents, impacts on milk
production, milk quality , oxidative profiles and treatment efficacy of
ceftiofur.

Alba DF(1), da Rosa G(1), Hanauer D(2), Saldanha TF(3), Souza CF(4), Baldissera
MD(4), da Silva Dos Santos D(5), Piovezan AP(6), Girardini LK(6), Schafer Da
Silva A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Animal Science, Universidade Do Estado de Santa Catarina
(UDESC), Chapecó, Brazil.
(2)Food Engineering, Universidade Do Estado de Santa Catarina (UDESC),
Pinhalzinho, Brazil.
(3)Department of Animal Science, Universidade Federal da Fronteira Sul (UFFS),
Realeza, Brazil.
(4)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria
(UFSM), Brazil.
(5)Department of Animal Science, UDESC, Chapecó, Brazil.
(6)Department of Animal Science, Universidade Do Oeste de Santa Catarina
(Unoesc), Xanxere, Brazil.
(7)Department of Animal Science, UDESC, Chapecó, Brazil. Electronic address:
aleksandro_ss@yahoo.com.br.

Mastitis is a major disease affecting dairy sheep. It is caused by microorganisms
that generate inflammation of the mammary gland in response to tissue invasion.
This syndrome affects the welfare of ewes, as well as the production and quality 
of the milk, thereby reducing its productive efficiency. Because mastitis causes 
inflammation process, it also increases the production of free radicals that
cause lesions via lipoperoxidation, causing damage to proteins, cells and
tissues. One way to minimize the impact of the disease is antimicrobial
treatment. Nevertheless, the continuous use of antimicrobials contributes to
microbial resistance, in addition to producing residues in the milk and
derivatives if not given during the grace period. Therefore, the objective of
this study was to evaluate the consequences of subclinical mastitis on ewe
health, milk production, milk composition and quality. We also evaluated the
susceptibility of the bacteria in vitro using disk diffusion antibiograms.
Finally, we performed two-way testing of efficacy of treatment in Lacaune ewes
using the same agents. In the first stage of the study, 30 lactating ewes (±90
days) were used, 10 of which were negative on the CMT (California Mastitis Test) 
used as control group (CG) and 20 sheep with subclinical mastitis diagnosed by
CMT (MG). Samples were collected and several analyses were performed on the milk 
and blood. We found that ewes in the MG had higher lipid peroxidation in serum
and milk, as well as lower production, with reduction of the total dry extract in
milk. There were 15 isolates of Staphylococcus hyicus, four isolates of each S.
epidermidis and S. intermedius, and two isolates of Corynebacterium spp. The
primary hematological result was leukocytosis in ewes with mastitis. Based on the
antibiogram, we chose ceftiofur for in vivo tests. In this stage, we divided the 
sheep with subclinical mastitis into two subgroups of 10 ewes each, to receive
drug by two routes: intramuscular (IM) and intramammary (IMM). In the IMM group, 
of the 10 CMT-positive ewes at the beginning of the experiment, seven were
already negative by the racket test 120 h after the last application (70%
efficacy). In the IM group, of the 10 positive ewes, only four were negative
after 120 h of the final application, a low efficacy treatment (40%). We
evaluated antimicrobial residues in the milk of treated animals. We found this
material within 5 days after treatment in the two forms used; despite the fact
that the product's stated withholding period is 3 days. We conclude that ewes
with mastitis produce less milk of lower quality. We also conclude that, although
ceftiofur is 100% effective in vitro, when used in ewes with mastitis, the
efficacy did not exceed 70%, and was more efficient when administered via the
intramammary route.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2019.103732 
PMID: 31505264  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

