
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 30:104542. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104542. [Epub
ahead of print]

Potentiating the activity of berberine for Staphylococcus aureus in a
combinatorial treatment with thymol.

Aksoy CS(1), Avci FG(2), Ugurel OM(3), Atas B(1), Sayar NA(1), Akbulut BS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Marmara University, 34722, Kadikoy, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(2)Department of Bioengineering, Uskudar University, 34662, Uskudar, Istanbul,
Turkey.
(3)Department of Basic Sciences, Altinbas University, Istanbul, Turkey;
Department of Bioengineering, Yildiz Technical University, 34210, Esenler,
Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Bioengineering, Marmara University, 34722, Kadikoy, Istanbul,
Turkey. Electronic address: berna.akbulut@marmara.edu.tr.

A plethora of natural products emerges as attractive molecules in the struggle
against antibiotic resistance. These molecules impose their bioactivities not
only alone but also in combinations as well, which further enhances their
effects. Berberine is a well-known isoquinoline alkaloid with antibacterial
activity. Unfortunately, it is readily extruded, which significantly reduces its 
efficacy and restricts its potential. Thymol is a monoterpenic phenol that
exhibits different biological activities but its major effect is observed only at
relatively high concentrations, which raises the concern on cytotoxicity. The aim
of the study was to potentiate the antibacterial activity of the berberine, in a 
combination treatment with thymol in the opportunistic pathogen Staphylococcus
aureus and understand the antibacterial mechanism of the combination treatment.
The synergism of berberine and thymol was first established by the checkerboard
assay. Then the antibacterial mechanism of the synergistic combination was
explored by growth curves, biofilm formation assay, SEM observation, and RNA-Seq 
based transcriptomic profiling. The checkerboard assay showed that 32 μg mL-1
berberine and 64 μg mL-1 thymol was a synergistic combination, concentrations
below their cytotoxicity limits for many cells. 32 μg mL-1 berberine and
32 μg mL-1 thymol was sufficient to inhibit biofilm formation. SEM images
confirmed the morphological changes on the structure of combination treated
cells. The major finding of the combination treatment from the transcriptomic
analysis was the repression in the expression of virulence factors or genes
related to virulence factors with the presence of thymol. Apart from the
particular changes related to the cell envelope, the majority of expressional
changes seemed to be similar to berberine-treated cells or to be resulting from
general stress conditions. The findings of this work showed that when thymol was 
used in combination with berberine, it enhanced its antibacterial activity in a
synergistic manner. Furthermore, thymol could be considered as an antivirulence
agent, disarming S. aureus cells.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104542 
PMID: 33010366 

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations of competing interest None.

