
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Apr 28;9(5). pii: E214. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9050214.

Plasticity of Coagulase-Negative Staphylococcal Membrane Fatty Acid Composition
and Implications for Responses to Antimicrobial Agents.

Tiwari KB(1), Gatto C(2), Wilkinson BJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)A-TEK Inc., 1430 Spring Hill Road, McLean, VA 22102, USA.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, IL 61761,
USA.

Staphylococcus aureus demonstrates considerable membrane lipid plasticity in
response to different growth environments, which is of potential relevance to
response and resistance to various antimicrobial agents. This information is not 
available for various species of coagulase-negative staphylococci, which are
common skin inhabitants, can be significant human pathogens, and are resistant to
multiple antibiotics. We determined the total fatty acid compositions of
Staphylococcus auricularis, Staphylococcus capitis, Staphylococcus epidermidis,
Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Staphylococcus hominis, Staphylococcus
saprophyticus, and Staphylococcus aureus for comparison purposes. Different
proportions of branched-chain and straight-chain fatty acids were observed
amongst the different species. However, growth in cation-supplemented
Mueller-Hinton broth significantly increased the proportion of branched-chain
fatty acids, and membrane fluidities as measured by fluorescence anisotropy.
Cation-supplemented Mueller-Hinton broth is used for routine determination of
antimicrobial susceptibilities. Growth in serum led to significant increases in
straight-chain unsaturated fatty acids in the total fatty acid profiles, and
decreases in branched-chain fatty acids. This indicates preformed fatty acids can
replace biosynthesized fatty acids in the glycerolipids of coagulase-negative
staphylococci, and indicates that bacterial fatty acid biosynthesis system II may
not be a good target for antimicrobial agents in these organisms. Even though the
different species are expected to be exposed to skin antimicrobial fatty acids,
they were susceptible to the major skin antimicrobial fatty acid sapienic acid
(C16:1Δ6). Certain species were not susceptible to linoleic acid (C18:2Δ9,12),
but no obvious relationship to fatty acid composition could be discerned.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9050214 
PMCID: PMC7277709
PMID: 32354049 

