
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 May 21;64(6). pii: e00172-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00172-20. Print 2020 May 21.

Novel Peptide from Commensal Staphylococcus simulans Blocks Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus aureus Quorum Sensing and Protects Host Skin from Damage.

Brown MM(1), Kwiecinski JM(1), Cruz LM(2), Shahbandi A(2), Todd DA(2), Cech
NB(2), Horswill AR(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, Greensboro, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA alexander.horswill@cuanschutz.edu.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs, Eastern Colorado Healthcare System, Aurora,
Colorado, USA.

Recent studies highlight the abundance of commensal coagulase-negative
staphylococci (CoNS) on healthy skin. Evidence suggests that CoNS actively shape 
the skin immunological and microbial milieu to resist colonization or infection
by opportunistic pathogens, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA), in a variety of mechanisms collectively termed colonization resistance.
One potential colonization resistance mechanism is the application of quorum
sensing, also called the accessory gene regulator (agr) system, which is
ubiquitous among staphylococci. Common and rare CoNS make autoinducing peptides
(AIPs) that function as MRSA agr inhibitors, protecting the host from invasive
infection. In a screen of CoNS spent media, we found that Staphylococcus
simulans, a rare human skin colonizer and frequent livestock colonizer, released 
potent inhibitors of all classes of MRSA agr signaling. We identified three S.
simulans agr classes and have shown intraspecies cross talk between noncognate S.
simulans agr types for the first time. The S. simulans AIP-I structure was
confirmed, and the novel AIP-II and AIP-III structures were solved via mass
spectrometry. Synthetic S. simulans AIPs inhibited MRSA agr signaling with
nanomolar potency. S. simulans in competition with MRSA reduced dermonecrotic and
epicutaneous skin injury in murine models. The addition of synthetic AIP-I also
effectively reduced MRSA dermonecrosis and epicutaneous skin injury in murine
models. These results demonstrate potent anti-MRSA quorum sensing inhibition by a
rare human skin commensal and suggest that cross talk between CoNS and MRSA may
be important in maintaining healthy skin homeostasis and preventing MRSA skin
damage during colonization or acute infection.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00172-20 
PMCID: PMC7269516 [Available on 2020-11-21]
PMID: 32253213 

