
1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2020 Sep 24;76:30-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2020.09.063.
[Epub ahead of print]

Sub-galeal abscess: A rare sequel of an infected scalp sebaceous cyst.

Nabri M(1), Alharbi M(2), Al-Sayyid A(3), Alabdrabalrasol K(4), Hassan K(2),
Al-Jehani H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Fahad Hospital of University, Imam Abdulrahman Bin
Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: manabri@iau.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Surgery, King Fahad Hospital of University, Imam Abdulrahman Bin
Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Medical Intern, King Fahad Hospital of University, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal
University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Medical Student in Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, King Fahad Hospital
of University, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, King Fahad Hospital of University, Imam
Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.

INTRODUCTION: Subgaleal abscess is a rare condition in which suppuration under
the galea aponeurotica (epicranial aponeurosis) occurs. Diagnosis of subgaleal
abscess is guided by high index of suspicion, imaging of the head by computed
topography will confirm the diagnosis and detect osteomyelitis or intracranial
extension.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: We describe a case of extensive subgaleal abscess that
presented as an infected scalp sebaceous cyst, in male diabetic patient, its
management and the role of vaccum assisted closure (V.A.C.) dressing which was
never described in such atypical presentation.
DISCUSSION: The subgaleal space is the between the galea aponeurotica and
periosteum of the cranial bones, subgaleal abscess may result from hematogenous
infection or contiguous spread, and the diagnosis may not be initially obvious4
The predominant organism isolated from post-traumatic and post-surgical scalp
infections is Staphylococcus aureus (Haines and Chou, 1985). Diagnosis and
management will be guided by head CT scan, management of subgaleal abscess should
focus on effective intravenous antibiotic therapy, immediate surgical drainage of
abscess and debridement of necrotic tissue.
CONCLUSION: Subgaleal abscess is a rare complication, imaging can prevent serious
complications. Negative pressure wound therapy is an invaluable tool for closure 
of the wounds.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2020.09.063 
PMID: 33010610 

