
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Feb 1;8(2). pii: E204. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8020204.

Characterization of Staphylococcus intermedius Group Isolates Associated with
Animals from Antarctica and Emended Description of Staphylococcus delphini.

Vrbovská V(1), Sedláček I(2), Zeman M(1)(2), Švec P(2), Kovařovic V(1), Šedo
O(3), Laichmanová M(2), Doškař J(1), Pantůček R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Department of Experimental
Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kotlářská 2, 611 37 Brno, Czech 
Republic.
(2)Czech Collection of Microorganisms, Department of Experimental Biology,
Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 00 Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Kamenice 5, 625 
00 Brno, Czech Republic.

Members of the genus Staphylococcus are widespread in nature and occupy a variety
of niches, however, staphylococcal colonization of animals in the Antarctic
environment has not been adequately studied. Here, we describe the first
isolation and characterization of two Staphylococcus intermedius group (SIG)
members, Staphylococcus delphini and Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, in
Antarctic wildlife. Staphylococcus delphini were found exclusively in Adélie
penguins. The report of S. pseudintermedius from Weddell seals confirmed its
occurrence in all families of the suborder Caniformia. Partial RNA polymerase
beta-subunit (rpoB) gene sequencing, repetitive PCR fingerprinting with the
(GTG)5 primer, and matrix-assisted laser-desorption/ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometry gave consistent identification results and proved to be
suitable for identifying SIG members. Comparative genomics of S. delphini
isolates revealed variable genomic elements, including new prophages, a novel
phage-inducible chromosomal island, and numerous putative virulence factors.
Surface and extracellular protein distribution were compared between genomes and 
showed strain-specific profiles. The pathogenic potential of S. delphini was
enhanced by a novel type of exfoliative toxin, trypsin-like serine protease
cluster, and enterotoxin C. Detailed analysis of phenotypic characteristics
performed on six Antarctic isolates of S. delphini and eight reference strains
from different animal sources enabled us to emend the species description of S.
delphini.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8020204 
PMCID: PMC7074773
PMID: 32024111 

