
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Oct 1. pii: S0091-6749(20)31335-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.09.023. [Epub ahead of print]

Staphylococcus aureus Second Immunoglobulin-Binding Protein drives atopic
dermatitis via IL-33.

Al Kindi A(1), Williams H(1), Matsuda K(2), Alkahtani AM(3), Saville C(1),
Bennett H(4), Alshammari Y(1), Tan SY(5), O'Neill C(6), Tanaka A(7), Matsuda
H(8), Arkwright PD(9), Pennock JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Center for Innovative Drug Discovery, University of Tsukuba, Japan.
(3)Department of Medicine, Microbiology and Parasitology, King Khalid University,
Abha, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Genome Editing Unit, University of Manchester, United Kingdom.
(5)National University Health System, Singapore.
(6)Division of Dermatological and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of
Manchester, United Kingdom.
(7)Laboratories of Veterinary Molecular Pathology & Therapeutics.
(8)Comparative Animal Medicine, Tokyo University of Agriculture & Technology,
Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Lydia Becker Institute of Immunology and Inflammation, University of
Manchester, United Kingdom. Electronic address: peter.arkwright@manchester.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: S. aureus is the dominant infective trigger of atopic dermatitis
(AD). How this bacterium drives type 2 allergic pathology in the absence of
infection in AD patients is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the S. aureus-derived virulence factor(s) that initiates
the cutaneous type 2-promoting immune response responsible for AD.
METHODS: In vitro human keratinocyte cell culture, ex vivo human skin organ
explants and the eczema prone Nc/Tnd mouse were used as model systems to assess
type-2 promoting immune responses to S. aureus. Identification of the bioactive
factor was accomplished using Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography and mass
spectrometry. Bioactivity was confirmed by cloning and expression in an E. coli
vector system, and S. aureus Sbi mutant strains confirming loss of activity.
RESULTS: S. aureus was unique amongst staphylococcal species in its ability to
induce the rapid release of constitutive IL-33 from human keratinocytes
independent of the toll-like receptor pathway. Using the eczema-prone NC/Tnd
mouse model, we showed that IL-33 was essential in inducing the immune response
to S. aureus in vivo. By fractionation and candidate testing, we identified the
Second Immunoglobulin-Binding Protein (Sbi) as the predominant
staphylococcus-derived virulence factor that directly drives IL-33 release from
human keratinocytes. Immunohistology of skin demonstrated that corneodesmosin, a 
component of corneodesmosomes that form key intercellular adhesive structures in 
the stratum corneum, was disrupted resulting in reduction of skin barrier
function.
CONCLUSION: S. aureus-derived Sbi is a unique type 2-promoting virulence factor
capable of initiating the type-2 promoting cytokine activity underlying AD.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: The Second Immunoglobulin-Binding Protein (Sbi) produced
solely by S. aureus species, is an important factor inducing type-2 promoting
cytokine responses and atopic dermatitis.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.09.023 
PMID: 33011245 

