
1. J Clin Pharm Ther. 2020 Jul 13. doi: 10.1111/jcpt.13215. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of breakthrough Gram-positive cocci infection during vancomycin vs
teicoplanin therapy in patients receiving haematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.

Ohata K(1), Kitagawa J(2), Niwa T(1), Takahashi-Yamauchi T(1), Harada S(1),
Matsumoto T(2), Nakamura N(2), Nakamura H(2), Kanemura N(2), Shimizu M(2), Suzuki
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Gifu University Hospital, Gifu, Japan.
(2)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University Graduate School of
Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

WHAT IS KNOWN AND OBJECTIVE: Our previous report indicated that teicoplanin
(TEIC) caused fewer adverse effects than vancomycin (VCM) in patients with
febrile neutropenia (FN) receiving haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT). However, we observed breakthrough methicillin-resistant-Staphylococcus
haemolyticus (MR-S haemolyticus) infection during TEIC therapy in these patients.
In this study, we sought to compare the incidence of breakthrough Gram-positive
cocci (GPC) infection during VCM and TEIC therapy in this population.
METHODS: A single-centre, retrospective cohort study was conducted. Patients who 
had received HSCT and were administered VCM (n = 19) or TEIC (n = 38) for FN from
1 September 2011 to 31 August 2019 were enrolled. We compared the incidence of
breakthrough GPC infection between the VCM and TEIC groups.
RESULTS: Breakthrough GPC infection during glycopeptide therapy in febrile
neutropenic patients received HSCT was observed in three patients (7.9%) in the
TEIC group but in none of patients (0%) in the VCM group. MR-S haemolyticus with 
low glycopeptide susceptibility (TEIC MIC = 2-8 μg/mL, VCM MIC = 2-4 μg/mL) was
isolated from blood cultures in all patients with breakthrough GPC infections.
All breakthrough infections were cured by changing from TEIC to daptomycin (DAP).
WHAT IS NEW AND CONCLUSION: The incidence of breakthrough GPC infection during
glycopeptide therapy in febrile neutropenic HSCT patients was higher in the TEIC 
group than in the VCM group. MR-S haemolyticus with low glycopeptide
susceptibility was isolated from all patients with breakthrough GPC infection and
successfully treated with DAP.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpt.13215 
PMID: 32656902 

