
1. Med J Malaysia. 2020 Mar;75(2):110-116.

Could bacteriophages isolated from the sewage be the solution to
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus?

Tan CS(1), Aqiludeen NA(2), Tan R(3), Gowbei A(3), Mijen AB(3), Santhana Raj
L(4), Ibrahim SF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tropical and Emerging Diseases, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia.
cstan@unimas.my.
(2)Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia.
(3)Sarawak General Hospital, Department of Pathology, Microbiology Unit, Kuching,
Sarawak, Malaysia.
(4)Institute for Medical Research, Medical Research Resource Centre, Electron
Microscopy Unit, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

INTRODUCTIONS: The emergence of multidrug-resistant bacteria such as
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) complicates the treatment of
the simplest infection. Although glycopeptides such as vancomycin still proves to
be effective in treating MRSA infections, the emergence of vancomycin-resistant
strains limits the long term use of this antibiotic. Bacteriophages are
ubiquitous bacterial viruses which is capable of infecting and killing bacteria
including its antibiotic-resistant strains. Bactericidal bacteriophages use
mechanisms that is distinct from antibiotics and is not affected by the
antibioticresistant phenotypes.
OBJECTIVES: The study was undertaken to evaluate the possibility to isolate
bacteriolytic bacteriophages against S.aureus from raw sewage water and examine
their efficacy as antimicrobial agents in vitro.
METHODS: Bacteriophages were isolated from the raw sewage using the agar overlay 
method. Isolated bacteriophages were plaque purified to obtain homogenous
bacteriophage isolates. The host range of the bacteriophages was determined using
the spot test assay against the 25 MRSA and 36 MSSA isolates obtained from the
Sarawak General Hospital. Staphylococcus saprophyticus, Staphylococcus sciuri and
Staphylococcus xylosus were included as non-SA controls. The identity of the
bacteriophages was identified via Transmission Electron Microscopy and genomic
size analysis. Their stability at different pH and temperature were elucidated.
RESULTS: A total of 10 lytic bacteriophages infecting S.aureus were isolated and 
two of them namely ΦNUSA-1 and ΦNUSA-10 from the family of Myoviridae and
Siphoviridae respectively exhibited exceptionally broad host range against >80%
of MRSA and MSSA tested. Both bacteriophages were specific to S.aureus and stable
at both physiologic pH and temperature.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated the abundance of S.aureus specific
bacteriophages in raw sewage. Their high virulence against both MSSA and MRSA is 
an excellent antimicrobial characteristic which can be exploited for
bacteriophage therapy against MRSA.


PMID: 32281590 

