
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2019 Dec 2;311:108356. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2019.108356. Epub 2019 Sep 7.

Environmental heterogeneity of Staphylococcus species from alkaline fermented
foods and associated toxins and antimicrobial resistance genetic elements.

Ouoba LII(1), Vouidibio Mbozo AB(2), Anyogu A(3), Obioha PI(4), Lingani-Sawadogo 
H(5), Sutherland JP(4), Jespersen L(6), Ghoddusi HB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Research Unit, School of Human Sciences, London Metropolitan
University, UK; Ouoba-Consulting, London, UK. Electronic address:
ouobairene@hotmail.com.
(2)Faculté des Sciences, Université Marien N'Gouabi, Brazzaville, Congo.
(3)Department of Life Sciences, Faculty of Science and Technology, University of 
Westminster, London, UK.
(4)Microbiology Research Unit, School of Human Sciences, London Metropolitan
University, UK.
(5)Département Technologie Alimentaire/IRSAT/CNRST, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso.
(6)Microbial Ecology and Food Fermentation, Faculty of Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Frederiskberg, Denmark.

Different samples of three products including Bikalga and Soumbala from Burkina
Faso (West Africa) and Ntoba Mbodi from Congo-Brazzaville (Central Africa) were
evaluated. The bacteria (400) were phenotyped and genotypically characterized by 
Rep-PCR, PFGE, 16S rRNA and rpoB gene sequencing and spa typing. Their PFGE
profiles were compared with those of 12,000 isolates in the Center for Disease
Control (CDC, USA) database. They were screened for the production of
enterotoxins, susceptibility to 19 antimicrobials, presence of 12 staphylococcal 
toxin and 38 AMR genes and the ability to transfer erythromycin and tetracycline 
resistance genes to Enterococcus faecalis JH2-2. Fifteen coagulase negative
(CoNS) and positive (CoPS) species characterized by 25 Rep-PCR/PFGE clusters were
identified: Staphylococcus arlettae, S. aureus, S. cohnii, S. epidermidis, S.
gallinarum, S. haemolyticus, S. hominis, S. pasteuri, S. condimenti, S.
piscifermentans, S. saprophyticus, S. sciuri, S. simulans, S. warneri and
Macrococcus caseolyticus. Five species were specific to Soumbala, four to Bikalga
and four to Ntoba Mbodi. Two clusters of S. gallinarum and three of S. sciuri
were particular to Burkina Faso. The S. aureus isolates exhibited a spa type t355
and their PFGE profiles did not match any in the CDC database. Bacteria from the 
same cluster displayed similar AMR and toxin phenotypes and genotypes, whereas
clusters peculiar to a product or a location generated distinct profiles. The
toxin genes screened were not detected and the bacteria did not produce the
staphylococcal enterotoxins A, B, C and D. AMR genes including blazA, cat501,
dfr(A), dfr(G), mecA, mecA1, msr(A) and tet(K) were identified in CoNS and CoPS. 
Conjugation experiments produced JH2-2 isolates that acquired resistance to
erythromycin and tetracycline, but no gene transfer was revealed by PCR. The
investigation of the heterogeneity of Staphylococcus species from alkaline
fermented foods, their relationship with clinical and environmental isolates and 
their safety in relation to antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and toxin production
is anticipated to contribute to determining the importance of staphylococci in
alkaline fermented foods, especially in relation to the safety of the consumers.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2019.108356 
PMID: 31670141  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

