
1. Ann Palliat Med. 2020 Jul;9(4):1666-1680. doi: 10.21037/apm-20-56. Epub 2020 Jun 
18.

Microbial quantitation of colostrum from healthy breastfeeding women and milk
from mastitis patients.

Tao YN(1), Tong XK(2), Qian C(3), Wan H(4), Zuo JP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai university of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China; Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai Fourth People's Hospital Affiliated to Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Breast, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai university of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Breast, Shuguang Hospital, Shanghai university of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Shanghai, China. drwanhua@163.com.
(5)Laboratory of Immunopharmacology, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. jpZuo@simm.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: Colostrum is rich in microbiota. However, the quantity of
microorganisms including both opportunistic pathogens and commensal mammary
microbiota remains fluctuant during lactation. And once dysbiosis occurred in
these microorganisms, a process in which the population of opportunistic
pathogens increases while other bacteria, commensal mammary microbiota decrease. 
Lactation mastitis might occur. There were few literatures of microbiota in
Chinese breastfeeding women. So this study aimed to investigate the quantity of
microbiota in the colostrum from healthy breastfeeding women and the milk from
mastitis patients in China.
METHODS: From January to December 2017, a total of 400 milk samples were
collected from the bilateral breasts of 200 women (104 healthy women and 86
mastitis patients). Microbial quantitation was done based on the conserved marker
gene 16s rRNA for Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Staphylococcus and
Streptococcus by Real-time PCR in all milk samples. The bacterial culture of milk
from mastitis patients was also performed.
RESULTS: In the colostrum, the amounts of Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium were 
significantly higher than those of Staphylococcus and Streptococcus (P<0.0001).
The amounts of all the detected bacteria in the colostrum were significantly
higher than in the milk from mastitis patients (P<0.01). The same results were
obtained in patients with bacteria unrelated mastitis (P<0.01). With respect to
colostrum samples, the Staphylococcus copies increased and Bifidobacterium copies
declined in cases caused by Staphylococcus aureus or Methicillinresistant
Staphylococcus aureus, while both the Staphylococcus and Bifidobacterium copies
declined in the milk from patients with Staphylococcus epidermidis or
Staphylococcus Lentus induced mastitis (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study reveal a large amount of microbiota in the
colostrum, and mammary microbial dysbiosis may be involved in the pathogenesis of
lactational mastitis.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-20-56 
PMID: 32576000 

