
1. Ceram Int. 2020 Sep 24. doi: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.09.177. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mixed oxide nanotubes in nanomedicine: A dead-end or a bridge to the future?

Sarraf M(1)(2), Nasiri-Tabrizi B(3)(4), Yeong CH(5), Madaah Hosseini HR(2),
Saber-Samandari S(4), Basirun WJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Advanced Materials, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of
Engineering, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Materials Science and Engineering Department, Sharif University of Technology,
P.O. Box 11155-9466, Azadi Avenue, Tehran, Iran.
(3)School of Biosciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Taylor's
University, Subang Jaya, Malaysia.
(4)New Technologies Research Center, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, 
Iran.
(5)School of Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Taylor's
University, Subang Jaya, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Nanomedicine has seen a significant rise in the development of new research tools
and clinically functional devices. In this regard, significant advances and new
commercial applications are expected in the pharmaceutical and orthopedic
industries. For advanced orthopedic implant technologies, appropriate nanoscale
surface modifications are highly effective strategies and are widely studied in
the literature for improving implant performance. It is well-established that
implants with nanotubular surfaces show a drastic improvement in new bone
creation and gene expression compared to implants without nanotopography.
Nevertheless, the scientific and clinical understanding of mixed oxide nanotubes 
(MONs) and their potential applications, especially in biomedical applications
are still in the early stages of development. This review aims to establish a
credible platform for the current and future roles of MONs in nanomedicine,
particularly in advanced orthopedic implants. We first introduce the concept of
MONs and then discuss the preparation strategies. This is followed by a review of
the recent advancement of MONs in biomedical applications, including
mineralization abilities, biocompatibility, antibacterial activity, cell culture,
and animal testing, as well as clinical possibilities. To conclude, we propose
that the combination of nanotubular surface modification with incorporating
sensor allows clinicians to precisely record patient data as a critical
contributor to evidence-based medicine.

© 2020 Elsevier Ltd and Techna Group S.r.l. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.09.177 
PMCID: PMC7513735
PMID: 32994658 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

