
1. J Clin Microbiol. 2019 Oct 23;57(11). pii: e00721-19. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00721-19. 
Print 2019 Nov.

Performance of Five Commercial Identification Platforms for Identification of
Staphylococcus delphini.

Canver MC(1), Tekle T(2), Compton ST(3), Callan K(1), Burd EM(4), Zimmer BL(5),
Bemis DA(#)(3), Carroll KC(#)(6), Westblade LF(#)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New
York, New York, USA.
(2)Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Biomedical and Diagnostic Sciences, University of Tennessee
College of Veterinary Medicine, Knoxville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Beckman Coulter, Inc., Sacramento, California, USA.
(6)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA
kcarrol7@jhmi.edu law9067@med.cornell.edu.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New
York, New York, USA kcarrol7@jhmi.edu law9067@med.cornell.edu.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The Staphylococcus intermedius group (SIG) is a collection of coagulase-positive 
staphylococci consisting of four distinct species, namely, Staphylococcus
cornubiensis, Staphylococcus delphini, Staphylococcus intermedius, and
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius SIG members are animal pathogens and rare causes 
of human infection. Accurate identification of S. pseudintermedius has important 
implications for interpretation of antimicrobial susceptibility testing data and 
may be important for other members of the group. Therefore, we sought to evaluate
the performance of five commercially available identification platforms with 21
S. delphini isolates obtained from a variety of animal and geographic sources.
Here, we show that automated biochemical platforms were unable to identify S.
delphini to the species level, a function of its omission from their databases,
but could identify isolates to the SIG level with various degrees of success.
However, all automated systems misidentified at least one isolate as
Staphylococcus aureus One matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of
flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) system was able to identify S. delphini
to the species level, suggesting that MALDI-TOF MS is the best option for
distinguishing members of the SIG. With the exception of S. pseudintermedius, it 
is unclear if other SIG members should be routinely identified to the species
level; however, as our understanding of their role in animal and human diseases
increases, it may be necessary and important to do so.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00721-19 
PMCID: PMC6813025
PMID: 31413084  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

