
1. Infect Drug Resist. 2020 Jun 30;13:2017-2026. doi: 10.2147/IDR.S254141.
eCollection 2020.

Effect of Short-Term Antimicrobial Therapy on the Tolerance and Antibiotic
Resistance of Multidrug-Resistant Staphylococcus capitis.

Yu X(#)(1), Zheng B(#)(1), Xiao F(2), Jin Y(1), Guo L(1), Xu H(1), Luo Q(1), Xiao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The First
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's
Republic of China.
(2)Neurosurgery Department, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

Background: Bacteria undergo adaptive mutation in the host. However, the specific
effect of antimicrobial use on bacterial evolution and genome mutations related
to bacterial survival within a patient is unclear.
Materials and Methods: Three S. capitis strains were sequentially isolated from
cerebrospinal fluid of a clinical inpatient. Antimicrobial susceptibility, growth
rate, biofilm formation and whole blood survival of these strains were measured. 
Relative fitness was calculated. The virulence was examined in the Galleria
mellonella model. Whole-genome sequencing and in silico analysis were performed
to explore the genetic mechanisms of the changes in antimicrobial resistance
phenotype. Hypothetical proteins are cloned, expressed and characterized by
detection the susceptibility to gentamycin.
Results: The first isolate was susceptible to rifampin (MIC=0.25 μg/mL),
resistant to gentamicin (MIC=16 μg/mL), while the later two isolates were
resistant to rifampin (MIC >64 μg/mL), susceptible to gentamicin (MIC=4 μg/mL).
For the latter two strains, compared to the first, frameshift mutation in a
hypothetical protein encoding gene and base substitutions (in genes saeR, moaA
and rpoB) were discovered. The mutation of rpoB gene caused rifampicin
resistance. Mutations in saeR, moaA and hypothetical gene are associated with
changes in other biological traits. Amino acid sequence-based structure and
function identification of the hypothetical protein indicated that a mutation in 
the encoding gene might be associated with altered aminoglycoside susceptibility.
Growth curve showed that the later two isolates grew faster than the first
isolate with a positive fitness advantage of 13.5%, and 14.8%, accordingly.
Biofilm form ability and whole blood survival of the derivative mutants were also
enhanced. No significant differences of virulence in the G. mellonella model were
observed.
Conclusion: We report here for the first time that short-term clinical antibiotic
use was associated with resistance mutations, collateral sensitivity, and
positive in vivo fitness advantages to S. capitis during infection.

© 2020 Yu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IDR.S254141 
PMCID: PMC7335296
PMID: 32636655 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

