
1. Elife. 2020 Jun 9;9. pii: e57322. doi: 10.7554/eLife.57322.

An ECF-type transporter scavenges heme to overcome iron-limitation in
Staphylococcus lugdunensis.

Jochim A(1), Adolf L(1), Belikova D(1), Schilling NA(2), Setyawati I(3), Chin
D(4), Meyers S(5), Verhamme P(5), Heinrichs DE(4), Slotboom DJ(3), Heilbronner
S(1)(6)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute of Microbiology and Infection Medicine, Department of
Infection Biology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Groningen Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of
Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Western Ontario,
London, Canada.
(5)Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)German Centre for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(7)(DFG) Cluster of Excellence EXC 2124 Controlling Microbes to Fight Infections,
Tübingen, Germany.

Energy-coupling factor type transporters (ECF) represent trace nutrient
acquisition systems. Substrate binding components of ECF-transporters are
membrane proteins with extraordinary affinity, allowing them to scavenge trace
amounts of ligand. A number of molecules have been described as substrates of
ECF-transporters, but an involvement in iron-acquisition is unknown. Host-induced
iron limitation during infection represents an effective mechanism to limit
bacterial proliferation. We identified the iron-regulated ECF-transporter Lha in 
the opportunistic bacterial pathogen Staphylococcus lugdunensis and show that the
transporter is specific for heme. The recombinant substrate-specific subunit LhaS
accepted heme from diverse host-derived hemoproteins. Using isogenic mutants and 
recombinant expression of Lha, we demonstrate that its function is independent of
the canonical heme acquisition system Isd and allows proliferation on human cells
as sources of nutrient iron. Our findings reveal a unique strategy of nutritional
heme acquisition and provide the first example of an ECF-transporter involved in 
overcoming host-induced nutritional limitation.

© 2020, Jochim et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.57322 
PMCID: PMC7299338
PMID: 32515736 

Conflict of interest statement: AJ, LA, DB, NS, IS, DC, SM, PV, DH, DS, SH No
competing interests declared

