
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18;86(17). pii: e01435-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01435-20. Print 2020 Aug 18.

Protein A-Mediated Binding of Staphylococcus spp. to Antibodies in Flow
Cytometric Assays and Reduction of This Binding by Using Fc Receptor Blocking
Reagent.

Cronin UP(1), Girardeaux L(2), O'Meara E(3), Wilkinson MG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Limerick, Castletroy, Ireland
ultan.cronin@ul.ie.
(2)LEGTPA Bordeaux Blanquefort (Lycée Agro-Viticole de Blanquefort), Blanquefort,
Bordeaux, France.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Limerick, Castletroy,
Ireland.

Staphylococcus aureus and other coagulase-positive Staphylococcus spp. bind the
Fc region of IgG antibodies through expression of protein A (SpA). These species 
have consequently been a source of false-positive signals in antibody-based
assays designed to detect other target bacteria. Here, flow cytometry was used to
study the influence of a number of factors on the SpA-mediated binding of single 
cells to an anti-human IgG antibody, including strain, heat killing, overnight
storage, growth phase, cell physiology, surface adhesion, and growth in model
food systems. Through the costaining of antibody-stained cells with the
permeability dye propidium iodide and calcein violet AM, the cell physiological
status was related to SpA-mediated antibody binding. Generally, permeabilized
cells lacking esterase activity did not strongly bind antibody. The binding of a 
number of commercially available polyclonal IgG antibodies to non-Staphylococcus 
spp. was also characterized. Not all SpA-expressing species showed strong binding
of mouse IgG, and one species not known to express SpA showed strong binding.
Most SpA-expressing strains bound rabbit IgG antibodies to some extent, whereas
only one strain bound goat IgG. To reduce or eliminate SpA-mediated IgG binding, 
the following products were evaluated as blocking reagents and applied prior to
staining with primary or secondary antibody: normal rabbit serum, mouse IgG
isotype control, goat IgG, and a commercial FcR blocking reagent. Only the FcR
blocking reagent consistently reduced SpA-mediated binding of Staphylococcus spp.
to antibodies against other species and could be recommended as a blocking
reagent in immunoassays designed to detect non-Staphylococcus species.IMPORTANCE 
This study characterizes a widespread but little-studied problem associated with 
the antibody-based detection of microbes-the Staphylococcus protein A
(SpA)-mediated binding of IgG antibodies-and offers a solution: the use of
commercial FcR blocking reagent. A common source of false-positive signals in the
detection of microbes in clinical, food, or environmental samples can be
eliminated by applying this study's findings. Using flow cytometry, the authors
demonstrate the extent of heterogeneity in a culture's SpA-mediated binding of
antibodies and that the degree of SpA-mediated antibody binding is strain, growth
phase, and food matrix dependent and influenced by simulated food processing
treatments and cell adherence. In addition, our studies of SpA-mediated binding
of Staphylococcus spp. to antibodies against other bacterial species produced a
very nuanced picture, leading us to recommend testing against multiple strains of
S. aureus and S. hyicus of all antibodies to be incorporated into any immunoassay
designed to detect a non-Staphylococcus spp.

Copyright © 2020 Cronin et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01435-20 
PMCID: PMC7440785
PMID: 32591386 

