
1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2020 Jul 4. pii: S0091-6749(20)30953-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2020.06.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Staphylococcus epidermidis protease EcpA can be a deleterious component of the
skin microbiome in atopic dermatitis.

Cau L(1), Williams MR(2), Butcher AM(2), Nakatsuji T(2), Kavanaugh JS(3), Cheng
JY(2), Shafiq F(2), Higbee K(2), Hata TR(2), Horswill AR(4), Gallo RL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
Calif; R&D Department, SILAB, Brive, France.
(2)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
Calif.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz,
Medical Campus, Aurora, Colo.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Colorado Anschutz,
Medical Campus, Aurora, Colo; Department of Veterans Affairs Eastern Colorado
Health Care System, Aurora, Colo.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
Calif; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, Calif. Electronic address: rgallo@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis are the most
abundant bacteria found on the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD). S
aureus is known to exacerbate AD, whereas S epidermidis has been considered a
beneficial commensal organism.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we hypothesized that S epidermidis could promote skin
damage in AD by the production of a protease that damages the epidermal barrier.
METHODS: The protease activity of S epidermidis isolates was compared with that
of other staphylococcal species. The capacity of S epidermidis to degrade the
barrier and induce inflammation was examined by using human keratinocyte tissue
culture and mouse models. Skin swabs from atopic and healthy adult subjects were 
analyzed for the presence of S epidermidis genomic DNA and mRNA.
RESULTS: S epidermidis strains were observed to produce strong cysteine protease 
activity when grown at high density. The enzyme responsible for this activity was
identified as EcpA, a cysteine protease under quorum sensing control. EcpA was
shown to degrade desmoglein-1 and LL-37 in vitro, disrupt the physical barrier,
and induce skin inflammation in mice. The abundance of S epidermidis and
expression of ecpA mRNA were increased on the skin of some patients with AD, and 
this correlated with disease severity. Another commensal skin bacterial species, 
Staphylococcus hominis, can inhibit EcpA production by S epidermidis.
CONCLUSION: S epidermidis has commonly been regarded as a beneficial skin
microbe, whereas S aureus has been considered deleterious. This study suggests
that the overabundance of S epidermidis found on some atopic patients can act
similarly to S aureus and damage the skin by expression of a cysteine protease.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2020.06.024 
PMID: 32634452 

