
1. BMJ Open. 2020 May 11;10(5):e038300. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-038300.

Bacteremia Antibiotic Length Actually Needed for Clinical Effectiveness (BALANCE)
randomised clinical trial: study protocol.

Daneman N(1), Rishu AH(2), Pinto RL(3), Arabi YM(4), Cook DJ(5), Hall R(6),
McGuinness S(7), Muscedere J(8), Parke R(9), Reynolds S(10), Rogers B(11),
Shehabi Y(12), Fowler RA(13); Canadian Critical Care Trials Group.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases & Clinical Epidemiology, Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Nick.Daneman@sunnybrook.ca.
(2)Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Intensive Care Department, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz University for Health
Sciences, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Departments of Critical Care Medicine and Anesthesiology, Pain Management and 
Perioperative Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(7)Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(8)Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(9)The University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(10)Royal Columbian Hospital, New Westminster, British Columbia, Canada.
(11)Centre for Inflammatory Diseases, Monash University School of Clinical
Sciences, Melborne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Critical Care and Perioperative Medicine, School of Clinical Sciences, Monash
University and Monash Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(13)Departments of Medicine and Critical Care Medicine, Sunnybrook Health
Sciences Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: Bloodstream infections are a leading cause of mortality and
morbidity; the duration of treatment for these infections is understudied.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: We will conduct an international, multicentre randomised
clinical trial of shorter (7 days) versus longer (14 days) antibiotic treatment
among hospitalised patients with bloodstream infections. The trial will include
3626 patients across 60 hospitals and 6 countries. We will include patients with 
blood cultures confirming a pathogenic bacterium after hospital admission.
Exclusion criteria will include patient factors (severe immunosuppression),
infection site factors (endocarditis, osteomyelitis, undrained abscesses,
infected prosthetic material) and pathogen factors (Staphylococcus aureus,
Staphylococcus lugdunensis, Candida and contaminant organisms). We will leave the
selection of specific antibiotics, doses and route of delivery to the discretion 
of treating physicians; no placebo control will be used given the diversity of
pathogens and sources of bacteraemia. The intervention will be assignment of
treatment duration to be 7 versus 14 days. We will minimise selection bias via
central randomisation with variable block sizes, with concealed allocation until 
day 7 of adequate antibiotic treatment. The primary outcome is 90-day survival;
we will test whether 7 days is non-inferior to 14 days of treatment, with a
non-inferiority margin of 4% absolute mortality. Secondary outcomes include
hospital and intensive care unit (ICU) mortality, relapse rates of bacteraemia,
hospital and ICU length of stay, mechanical ventilation and vasopressor duration,
antibiotic-free days, Clostridium difficile infection, antibiotic allergy and
adverse events and colonisation/infection with antibiotic-resistant organisms.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: The study has been approved by the ethics review board 
at each participating site. Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre is the central
ethics committee. We will disseminate study results via the Canadian Critical
Care Trials Group and other collaborating networks to set the global paradigm for
antibiotic treatment duration for non-staphylococcal Gram-positive, Gram-negative
and anaerobic bacteraemia, among patients admitted to hospital.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: The BALANCE (Bacteremia Antibiotic Length Actually
Needed for Clinical Effectiveness) trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov
(registration number: NCT03005145).

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-038300 
PMCID: PMC7223357
PMID: 32398341 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

