
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Sep 8;202(19). pii: e00294-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00294-20. Print 
2020 Sep 8.

Structural Visualization of Septum Formation in Staphylococcus warneri Using
Atomic Force Microscopy.

Su HN(1), Li K(1)(2), Zhao LS(1), Yuan XX(1), Zhang MY(1), Liu SM(1), Chen XL(1),
Liu LN(3)(4), Zhang YZ(5)(6)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research
Center, Shandong University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Laboratory for Marine Biology and Biotechnology, Qingdao National Laboratory
for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, China.
(3)College of Marine Life Sciences and Frontiers Science Center for Deep Ocean
Multispheres and Earth System, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China
Luning.Liu@liverpool.ac.uk zhangyz@sdu.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research
Center, Shandong University, Qingdao, China Luning.Liu@liverpool.ac.uk
zhangyz@sdu.edu.cn.
(6)College of Marine Life Sciences and Frontiers Science Center for Deep Ocean
Multispheres and Earth System, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.

Cell division of Staphylococcus adopts a "popping" mechanism that mediates
extremely rapid separation of the septum. Elucidating the structure of the septum
is crucial for understanding this exceptional bacterial cell division mechanism. 
Here, the septum structure of Staphylococcus warneri was extensively
characterized using high-speed time-lapse confocal microscopy, atomic force
microscopy, and electron microscopy. The cells of S. warneri divide in a fast
popping manner on a millisecond timescale. Our results show that the septum is
composed of two separable layers, providing a structural basis for the ultrafast 
daughter cell separation. The septum is formed progressively toward the center
with nonuniform thickness of the septal disk in radial directions. The
peptidoglycan on the inner surface of double-layered septa is organized into
concentric rings, which are generated along with septum formation. Moreover, this
study signifies the importance of new septum formation in initiating new cell
cycles. This work unravels the structural basis underlying the popping mechanism 
that drives S. warneri cell division and reveals a generic structure of the
bacterial cell.IMPORTANCE This work shows that the septum of Staphylococcus
warneri is composed of two layers and that the peptidoglycan on the inner surface
of the double-layered septum is organized into concentric rings. Moreover, new
cell cycles of S. warneri can be initiated before the previous cell cycle is
complete. This work advances our knowledge about a basic structure of bacterial
cell and provides information on the double-layered structure of the septum for
bacteria that divide with the "popping" mechanism.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00294-20 
PMCID: PMC7484183 [Available on 2021-03-08]
PMID: 32900866 

