
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Jun 4;16(6):e1007806. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007806.
eCollection 2020 Jun.

Potent, specific MEPicides for treatment of zoonotic staphylococci.

Edwards RL(1), Heueck I(1), Lee SG(2), Shah IT(1), Miller JJ(1), Jezewski AJ(3), 
Mikati MO(1), Wang X(4), Brothers RC(4), Heidel KM(4), Osbourn DM(5), Burnham
CD(1)(3)(6), Alvarez S(7), Fritz SA(1), Dowd CS(4), Jez JM(8), Odom John
AR(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.
(2)University of North Carolina-Wilmington, Wilmington, North Carolina, United
States of America.
(3)Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(4)Department of Chemistry, George Washington University, Washington, DC, United 
States of America.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States of America.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(7)Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,
Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America.
(8)Department of Biology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri, United
States of America.

Coagulase-positive staphylococci, which frequently colonize the mucosal surfaces 
of animals, also cause a spectrum of opportunistic infections including skin and 
soft tissue infections, urinary tract infections, pneumonia, and bacteremia.
However, recent advances in bacterial identification have revealed that these
common veterinary pathogens are in fact zoonoses that cause serious infections in
human patients. The global spread of multidrug-resistant zoonotic staphylococci, 
in particular the emergence of methicillin-resistant organisms, is now a serious 
threat to both animal and human welfare. Accordingly, new therapeutic targets
that can be exploited to combat staphylococcal infections are urgently needed.
Enzymes of the methylerythritol phosphate pathway (MEP) of isoprenoid
biosynthesis represent potential targets for treating zoonotic staphylococci.
Here we demonstrate that fosmidomycin (FSM) inhibits the first step of the
isoprenoid biosynthetic pathway catalyzed by deoxyxylulose phosphate
reductoisomerase (DXR) in staphylococci. In addition, we have both enzymatically 
and structurally determined the mechanism by which FSM elicits its effect. Using 
a forward genetic screen, the glycerol-3-phosphate transporter GlpT that
facilitates FSM uptake was identified in two zoonotic staphylococci,
Staphylococcus schleiferi and Staphylococcus pseudintermedius. A series of
lipophilic ester prodrugs (termed MEPicides) structurally related to FSM were
synthesized, and data indicate that the presence of the prodrug moiety not only
substantially increased potency of the inhibitors against staphylococci but also 
bypassed the need for GlpT-mediated cellular transport. Collectively, our data
indicate that the prodrug MEPicides selectively and robustly inhibit DXR in
zoonotic staphylococci, and further, that DXR represents a promising, druggable
target for future development.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007806 
PMCID: PMC7297381
PMID: 32497104  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors (AROJ, RLE, CSD) declare their status
as co-inventors of U.S. provisional patent 62/686,416 filed June 18, 2018.

