
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Feb 18;86(5). pii: e02165-19. doi:
10.1128/AEM.02165-19. Print 2020 Feb 18.

Attenuated Lactococcus lactis and Surface Bacteria as Tools for Conditioning the 
Microbiota and Driving the Ripening of Semisoft Caciotta Cheese.

Calasso M(1), Minervini F(1), De Filippis F(2)(3), Ercolini D(2)(3), De Angelis
M(4), Gobbetti M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Agricultural Sciences, University Federico II of Napoli, Naples,
Italy.
(3)Task Force on Microbiome Studies, University Federico II of Napoli, Naples,
Italy.
(4)Department of Soil, Plant and Food Sciences, University of Bari Aldo Moro,
Bari, Italy maria.deangelis@uniba.it.
(5)Faculty of Science and Technology, Free University of Bozen, Bolzano, Italy.

This study aimed at establishing the effects of attenuated starters and surface
bacteria on various features of caciotta cheese. The cheese undergoes a ripening 
period during which the house microbiota contaminates the surface. Conventional
cheese (the control cheese [CC]) is made using only primary starters. Primary
starters and attenuated (i.e., unable to grow and synthesize lactic acid)
Lactococcus lactis (Lc. lactis) subsp. lactis were used to produce caciotta
cheese without (ATT cheese) or with an inoculum of surface bacteria: (i)
Leuconostoc lactis (Le. lactis) (LL cheese), (ii) Vibrio casei (VC cheese), (iii)
Staphylococcus equorum (SE cheese), (iv) Brochothrix thermosphacta (BX cheese),
and (v) a mixture of all four (MIX cheese). Attenuated Lc. lactis increased
microbial diversity during cheese ripening. At the core, attenuated starter
mainly increased indigenous lactococci and Lactobacillus delbrueckii group
bacteria. At the surface, the main effect was on Macrococcus caseolyticus
Autochthonous Le. lactis strains took advantage of the attenuated starter,
becoming dominant. Adjunct Le. lactis positively affected Lactobacillus sakei
group bacteria on the LL cheese surface. Adjunct V. casei, S. equorum, and B.
thermosphacta did not become dominant. Surfaces of VC, SE, and BX cheeses mainly 
harbored Staphylococcus succinus Peptidase activities were higher in cheeses made
with attenuated starter than in CC, which had the lowest concentration of free
amino acids. Based on the enzymatic activities of adjunct Le. lactis, LL and MIX 
cheeses exhibited the highest glutamate dehydrogenase, cystathionine-γ-lyase, and
esterase activities. As shown by multivariate statistical analyses, LL and MIX
cheeses showed the highest similarity for microbiological and biochemical
features. LL and MIX cheeses received the highest scores for overall sensory
acceptability.IMPORTANCE This study provides in-depth knowledge of the effects of
attenuated starters and surface bacterial strains on the microbiota and related
metabolic activities during cheese ripening. The use of attenuated Lc. lactis
strongly impacted the microbiota assembly of caciotta cheese. This led to
improved biochemical and sensory features compared to conventional cheese. Among 
surface bacterial strains, Le. lactis played a key role in the metabolic
activities involved in cheese ripening. This resulted in an improvement of the
sensory quality of caciotta cheese. The use of attenuated lactic acid bacteria
and the surface adjunct Le. lactis could be a useful biotechnology to improve the
flavor formation of caciotta cheese.

Copyright © 2020 Calasso et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.02165-19 
PMCID: PMC7028956
PMID: 31862717  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

