
1. Vet Microbiol. 2020 Mar;242:108594. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108594. Epub 2020 
Jan 24.

Non-S. aureus staphylococci (NAS) in milk samples: Infection or contamination?

Hamel J(1), Zhang Y(2), Wente N(2), Krömker V(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover, Faculty II, Department of
Bioprocess Engineering - Microbiology, Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
Johannes.Hamel@gmx.de.
(2)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover, Faculty II, Department of
Bioprocess Engineering - Microbiology, Hannover, Germany.
(3)University of Applied Sciences and Arts Hannover, Faculty II, Department of
Bioprocess Engineering - Microbiology, Hannover, Germany; University of
Copenhagen, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Department of Veterinary and 
Animal Sciences, Section Production, Nutrition and Health, Denmark. Electronic
address: Volker.Kroemker@sund.ku.dk.

Non-S. aureus staphylococci (NAS) are the most frequently isolated pathogens from
bovine milk and can cause intramammary infections (IMI). They can also be found
in teat canals, on bovine skin and in cows' environment, which may lead to
unnoticed contamination of milk samples. The aim of this study was to investigate
the role of NAS species as mastitis-causing pathogens or contaminants, and to
identify possible differences between NAS species. A longitudinal study was
conducted with consecutive milk sampling in five German dairy herds. Species
identification was performed using matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry. Infections were distinguished from
contaminations using two different definitions based on the repeated detection of
an NAS species. Of 15 NAS species found, eight and ten, respectively, were
associated with an IMI. Staphylococcus simulans and S. chromogenes were
associated with IMI in more than 90 % of the findings. S. warneri, S. xylosus, S.
microti, S. haemolyticus, and S. succinus seem to be frequent causes of IMI as
well as contaminants. If a species-differentiation is available after cultivating
NAS, the findings should be interpreted in consideration of the observations made
in this study, whether it is more likely a question of a contaminant or a cause
of intramammary infection. The bacteria shedding intensity of the NAS species
with a more substantially adverse effect on udder health seems to be higher than 
that of the less important NAS pathogens.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108594 
PMID: 32122598 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

