
1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2020 May 1;75(5):1206-1211. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkaa004.

Evaluation of penicillin G susceptibility testing methods for Staphylococcus
lugdunensis.

Hagstrand Aldman M(1)(2), Påhlman LI(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Skåne University Hospital Lund, Lund, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Division of Infection Medicine, Lund
University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Staphylococcus lugdunensis belongs to the CoNS group, but is regarded
to be more virulent than most other CoNS. It is also remarkably susceptible to
antibiotics, including penicillin G.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate different methods for penicillin susceptibility testing, 
to assess penicillin susceptibility rates among S. lugdunensis and to describe
the clinical presentation including antibiotic treatment.
METHODS: Clinical isolates of S. lugdunensis were tested for penicillin
susceptibility using disc diffusion according to CLSI (10 U disc) and EUCAST (1 U
disc), assessment of zone-edge appearance, nitrocefin test and Etest for MIC
determination. PCR of the blaZ gene was used as a reference method.
RESULTS: Of the 112 isolates included in the study, 67% were susceptible to
penicillin G according to blaZ PCR. The EUCAST disc diffusion test had 100%
sensitivity, whereas the CLSI method had one very major error with a
false-susceptible isolate. When zone-edge appearance was included in the
assessment, the false-susceptible isolate was correctly classified as resistant. 
Foreign-body infection was the most common focus of infection, affecting 49% of
the participants. Only 4% of the patients were treated with penicillin G.
CONCLUSIONS: Penicillin susceptibility is common in S. lugdunensis and the disc
diffusion method according to EUCAST had a higher sensitivity than that of CLSI. 
Assessment of zone-edge appearance could increase the sensitivity of the disc
diffusion test. Penicillin susceptibility testing and treatment should be
considered in S. lugdunensis infections.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkaa004 
PMCID: PMC7177478
PMID: 32016343 

