
1. Front Vet Sci. 2020 Jul 23;7:376. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00376. eCollection
2020.

Molecular Detection and Characterization of the mecA and nuc Genes From
Staphylococcus Species (S. aureus, S. pseudintermedius, and S. schleiferi)
Isolated From Dogs Suffering Superficial Pyoderma and Their Antimicrobial
Resistance Profiles.

González-Domínguez MS(1), Carvajal HD(2), Calle-Echeverri DA(2),
Chinchilla-Cárdenas D(3).

Author information: 
(1)INCA-CES Research Group, Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine and Zootechny, CES University, Medellín, Colombia.
(2)Instituto Colombiano de Medicina Tropical (ICMT), CES University, Medellín,
Colombia.
(3)Laboratorio de Genética Animal Mascolab S. A., Medellín, Colombia.

Canine superficial pyoderma (CSP) is a bacterial infection secondary to several
skin diseases of the dog. Staphylococcus pseudintermedius, which is a commensal
bacterium of the dog's skin, is the leading agent found in dogs affected by CSP, 
which can progress to deep pyoderma. It is also of clinical significance because 
S. pseudintermedius strains carry antimicrobial resistance genes, mainly the mecA
gene. In this descriptive longitudinal study, molecular characterization of
bacterial isolates from dogs affected by CSP was performed in addition to
phenotyping, antimicrobial profiling, and assessment of resistance carriage
status. Fifty dogs (24 females and 26 males) attending the CES University
Veterinary Teaching Hospital were included in the study. CSP was confirmed
according to clinical signs and cytological examination. Swabs were taken from
active skin lesions for bacterial culture, and phenotyping and antimicrobial
resistance profiles were assessed using API-Staph phenotyping and the Kirby-Bauer
method, respectively. We also performed molecular detection and characterization 
of the mecA and nuc encoding gene of coagulase-positive Staphylococci. The mecA
gene frequency was established by qPCR amplification of a 131bp gene fragment.
Data were evaluated by descriptive statistics. Erythema, peeling, pruritus, and
alopecia were the predominant symptoms (72, 56, and 46%, respectively). We
isolated bacteria compatible with Staphylococcus species from all samples tested.
API phenotyping showed 83.1 to 97.8% compatibility with S. pseudintermedius.
PCR-genotyping resulted in 15, 3, and 1 isolates positive for S.
pseudintermedius, S. aureus, and S. schleiferi, respectively. Isolated strains
showed high susceptibility to Imipenem, Ampicillin/Sulbactam, and Rifampicin
(100, 94, and 92%, respectively). The highest resistance was against Vancomycin
and Trimethoprim/Sulfamethoxazole (98 and 74%, respectively). S.
pseudintermedius, S. aureus, and S. schleiferi isolates were cloned and shared
96% sequence homology. Finally, we found 62% carriage status of the mecA gene in 
isolates of CSP patients, although only 36% of the isolates were
methicillin-resistant. Identification of three Staphylococcus species causing
CSP, high-level resistance against conventional antimicrobials, and carriage of
the mecA gene highlight the importance of performing molecular characterization
of bacteria causing dermatological conditions in dogs.

Copyright © 2020 González-Domínguez, Carvajal, Calle-Echeverri and
Chinchilla-Cárdenas.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2020.00376 
PMCID: PMC7390895
PMID: 32793641 

