
1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2020 Mar 31. pii: S1198-743X(20)30173-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cmi.2020.03.028. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular diagnosis of polymicrobial brain abscesses with 16S-rDNA-based
next-generation sequencing.

Stebner A(1), Ensser A(2), Geißdörfer W(1), Bozhkov Y(3), Lang R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Germany.
(2)Virologisches Institut, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.
(3)Neurochirurgische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.
(4)Institut für Klinische Mikrobiologie, Immunologie und Hygiene,
Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Germany. Electronic address: roland.lang@uk-erlangen.de.

OBJECTIVES: Brain abscesses lead to high mortality despite antibiotic and
surgical treatment. Identification of causative bacteria is important to guide
antibiotic therapy, but culture-based methods and molecular diagnostics by Sanger
sequencing of 16S PCR products are hampered by antibiotic treatment and the often
polymicrobial nature of brain abscesses. We have applied 16S-rRNA-based
next-generation sequencing (NGS) for metagenomic analysis of intracranial abscess
(brain and epidural) and meningitis samples.
METHODS: Seventy-nine samples from 54 patients with intracranial abscesses or
meningitis were included. DNA was subjected to 16S PCR. Amplicons were analysed
with the Illumina MiSeq system, sequence reads were blasted versus the NCBI 16S
bacterial database and analysed using MEGAN software. Results were compared to
those of gram-staining, culture and Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: The NGS workflow was successful for 51 intracranial abscesses (46 brain 
and five epidural) and nine meningitis samples. Inclusion of (mono)bacterial
meningitis samples allowed us to establish a cut-off criterion for the exclusion 
of contaminating sequences. In total 86 bacterial taxa were identified in brain
abscesses by NGS, with Streptococcus intermedius and Fusobacterium nucleatum as
most prevalent species; Propionibacterium and Staphylococcus spp. were associated
with epidural abscesses. NGS identified two or more bacterial taxa in 31/51
intracranial abscesses, revealing the polymicrobial nature of these infections
and allowing the discrimination of up to 16 bacterial taxa per sample.
CONCLUSION: These results extend earlier studies showing that NGS methods expand 
the spectrum of bacteria detected in brain abscesses and demonstrate that the
MiSeq platform is suitable for metagenomic diagnostics of this severe infection.

Copyright © 2020 European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious
Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cmi.2020.03.028 
PMID: 32244052 

