
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 18;86(17). pii: e01177-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01177-20. Print 2020 Aug 18.

Primary and Secondary Succession Mediate the Accumulation of Biogenic Amines
during Industrial Semidry Chinese Rice Wine Fermentation.

Luo Y(1), Huang Y(1), Xu RX(1), Qian B(2), Zhou JW(3), Xia XL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China.
(2)Zhejiang Guyue Longshan Shaoxing Wine Co. Ltd., Shaoxing, People's Republic of
China.
(3)National Engineering Laboratory for Cereal Fermentation Technology, Jiangnan
University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, Ministry of Education, School of
Biotechnology, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, People's Republic of China
xiaolexia@jiangnan.edu.cn.

The use of exogenous functional microorganisms to regulate biogenic amine (BA)
content is a common approach in fermentation systems. Here, to better understand 
the microbial traits of succession trajectories in resource-based and biotic
interference systems, the BA-related primary and secondary succession were
tracked during industrial semidry Chinese rice wine (CRW) fermentation. Dominant 
abundance and BA-associated microbial functionality based on phylogenetic
investigation of communities by reconstruction of unobserved states (PICRUSt)
indicated that Citrobacter, Acinetobacter, Lactobacillus, Exiguobacterium,
Bacillus, Pseudomonas, and Enterobacter spp. prominently contributed to the
decarboxylase gene family in CRW. The expression levels of tyrosine decarboxylase
(tyrDC), ornithine decarboxylase (odc), and agmatine deiminase (aguA) genes were 
assessed by quantitative PCR (qPCR). The transcription levels of these genes did 
not correlate with the BA formation rate during postfermentation, indicating that
acidification and carbon source depletion upregulated the expression and microbes
launch the dormancy strategy to respond to unfavorable conditions. Furthermore,
microbial interference with CRW fermentation by Lactobacillus plantarum (ACBC271)
and Staphylococcus xylosus (CGMCC1.8382) coinoculated at a ratio of 1:2 exhibited
the best synergetic control of BA content. Spearman correlations revealed that
Lactobacillus and Staphylococcus exhibited influence on BA-associated microbiota 
(|ρ| > 0), Exiguobacterium and Pseudomonas were strongly suppressed by
Lactobacillus (ρ = -0.867 and ρ = -0.782, respectively; P < 0.05), and
Staphylococcus showed the strongest inhibitory effect toward Lactobacillus (ρ =
-0.115) and Citrobacter (ρ = -0.188) in the coinoculated 1:2 group. The high
inhibitory effect of exogenous added strains on specific bacteria presented
evidence for the obtained BA-associated contributors. Overall, this work provides
important insight into the microbial traits that rely on resource usage and
functional microbiota within food microbial ecology.IMPORTANCE Understanding the 
shifting patterns of substance usage and microbial interactions is a fundamental 
objective within microbiology and ecology. Analyses of primary and secondary
microbial succession allow for determinations of taxonomic diversity, community
traits, and functional transformations over time or after a disturbance. The
kinetics of BA generation and the patterns of resource consumption, functional
metagenome prediction, and microbial interactions were profiled to elucidate the 
equilibrium mechanism of microbial systems. Secondary succession after a
disturbance triggers a change in resource usage, which in turn affects primary
succession and metabolism. In this study, the functional potential of exogenous
microorganisms under disturbance synergized with secondary succession strategies,
including rebalancing and dormancy, which ultimately reduced BA accumulation.
Thus, this succession system could facilitate the settling of essential issues
with respect to microbial traits that rely on resource usage and microbial
interactions that occur in natural ecosystems.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01177-20 
PMCID: PMC7440807 [Available on 2021-02-18]
PMID: 32591381 

