
1. Microorganisms. 2019 Nov 19;7(11). pii: E580. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms7110580.

Staphylococcus arlettae Genomics: Novel Insights on Candidate Antibiotic
Resistance and Virulence Genes in an Emerging Opportunistic Pathogen.

Lavecchia A(1), Chiara M(2), De Virgilio C(1), Manzari C(3), Monno R(4), De Carlo
A(5), Pazzani C(6), Horner D(2)(3), Pesole G(1), Placido A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Biopharmaceutics, University of
Bari "Aldo Moro", 70126 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biosciences, University of Milan, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(3)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies,
National Research Council, 70126 Bari, Italy.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs,
University of Bari Aldo Moro, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(5)U.O.C. Hospital-University Analysis Laboratory-U.O.S.D. Microbiology and
Virology-OO. RR., 71122 Foggia, Italy.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Coagulase Negative Staphylococci (CoNS) are becoming increasingly recognized as
an important cause of human and animal infections. Notwithstanding their clinical
relevance, annotation of genes potentially involved in pathogenicity and/or
antibiotic resistance in the CoNS species Staphylococcus arlettae (SAR) is
currently very limited. In the current work we describe the genome of a novel
methicillin resistant isolate of SAR, which we named Bari, and present a
comprehensive analysis of predicted antibiotic resistance profiles and virulence 
determinants for all the 22 currently available SAR genomes. By comparing
predicted antibiotic resistance and virulence-associated genes with those
obtained from a manual selection of 148 bacterial strains belonging to 14
different species of staphylococci and to two "outgroup" species, Bacillus
subtilis (BS) and Macrococcus caseoliticus (MC), we derived some interesting
observations concerning the types and number of antibiotic resistance-related and
virulence-like genes in SAR. Interestingly, almost 50% of the putative antibiotic
resistance determinants identified in this work, which include the clinically
relevant mec, van, and cls genes, were shared among all the SAR strains herein
considered (Bari included). Moreover, comparison of predicted antibiotic
resistance profiles suggest that SAR is closely related to well-known pathogenic 
Staphylococcus species, such as Staphylococcus aureus (SA) and Staphylococcus
epidermidis (SE). A similar analysis of predicted virulence factors, revealed
that several genes associated with pathogenesis (including, for example, ica,
nuc, and ssp), which are commonly found in the genomes of pathogenic
staphylococci such as Staphylococcus haemolyticus (SH) and Staphylococcus
saprophyticus (SS), are observed also in the SAR strains for which a genomic
sequence is available. All in all, we believe that the analyses presented in the 
current study, by providing a consistent and comprehensive annotation of
virulence and antibiotic resistance-related genes in SAR, can constitute a
valuable resource for the study of molecular mechanisms of opportunistic
pathogenicity in this species.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms7110580 
PMCID: PMC6920755
PMID: 31752379 

