
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jan 24;11:39. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00039. eCollection
2020.

Role of the LytSR Two-Component Regulatory System in Staphylococcus lugdunensis
Biofilm Formation and Pathogenesis.

Dahyot S(1), Oxaran V(2), Niepceron M(3), Dupart E(3), Legris S(3), Destruel
L(3), Didi J(3), Clamens T(4), Lesouhaitier O(4), Zerdoumi Y(5), Flaman JM(5),
Pestel-Caron M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Groupe de Recherche sur l'Adaptation Microbienne (GRAM 2.0), Department of
Bacteriology, Rouen University Hospital, Normandie University, UNIROUEN, UNICAEN,
Rouen, France.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Border Biomedical Research Center,
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, United States.
(3)Groupe de Recherche sur l'Adaptation Microbienne (GRAM 2.0), Normandie
University, UNIROUEN, UNICAEN, Rouen, France.
(4)Laboratory of Microbiology Signals and Microenvironment (LMSM), Normandie
University, UNIROUEN, Evreux, France.
(5)INSERM U1245, Normandy Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen
University Hospital, Normandie University, UNIROUEN, Rouen, France.

Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a coagulase negative Staphylococcus recognized as a
virulent pathogen. It is responsible for a wide variety of infections, some of
which are associated with biofilm production, such as implanted medical device
infections or endocarditis. However, little is known about S. lugdunensis
regulation of virulence factor expression. Two-component regulatory systems (TCS)
play a critical role in bacterial adaptation, survival, and virulence. Among
them, LytSR is widely conserved but has variable roles in different organisms,
all connected to metabolism or cell death and lysis occurring during biofilm
development. Therefore, we investigated here the functions of LytSR in S.
lugdunensis pathogenesis. Deletion of lytSR in S. lugdunensis DSM 4804 strain did
not alter either susceptibility to Triton X-100 induced autolysis or death
induced by antibiotics targeting cell wall synthesis. Interestingly, ΔlytSR
biofilm was characterized by a lower biomass, a lack of tower structures, and a
higher rate of dead cells compared to the wild-type strain. Virulence toward
Caenorhabditis elegans using a slow-killing assay was significantly reduced for
the mutant compared to the wild-type strain. By contrast, the deletion of lytSR
had no effect on the cytotoxicity of S. lugdunensis toward the human keratinocyte
cell line HaCaT. Transcriptional analyses conducted at mid- and late-exponential 
phases showed that lytSR deletion affected the expression of 286 genes. Most of
them were involved in basic functions such as the metabolism of amino acids,
carbohydrates, and nucleotides. Furthermore, LytSR appeared to be involved in the
regulation of genes encoding known or putative virulence and colonization
factors, including the fibrinogen-binding protein Fbl, the major autolysin AtlL, 
and the type VII secretion system. Overall, our data suggest that the LytSR TCS
is implicated in S. lugdunensis pathogenesis, through its involvement in biofilm 
formation and potentially by the control of genes encoding putative virulence
factors.

Copyright © 2020 Dahyot, Oxaran, Niepceron, Dupart, Legris, Destruel, Didi,
Clamens, Lesouhaitier, Zerdoumi, Flaman and Pestel-Caron.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00039 
PMCID: PMC6993578
PMID: 32038604 

