
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 Aug 18. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0189. [Epub ahead of
print]

Staphylococcus sciuri as a Reservoir of mecA to Staphylococcus aureus in
Non-Migratory Seabirds from a Remote Oceanic Island.

Saraiva MMS(1), de Leon CMCG(2), Silva NMVD(2), Raso TF(3), Serafini PP(4),
Givisiez PEN(2), Gebreyes WA(5)(6), Oliveira CJB(2)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ornithopathology, Department of Veterinary Pathology, Sao Paulo 
State University, Jaboticabal, Brazil.
(2)Department of Animal Science, Federal University of Paraiba, Areia, Brazil.
(3)Department of Pathology, School of Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science,
University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(4)National Center for Wild Bird Conservation and Research, Chico Mendes
Institute for Biodiversity Conservation, Florianopolis, Brazil.
(5)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(6)Global One Health Initiative, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Aim: Genomic analysis of a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)
strain cultured from a non-migratory seabird at Fernando de Noronha Archipelago
(Brazilian oceanic islands) was carried out to investigate the potential origin
of MRSA genetic determinants in an ecological setting with minimal or absent
antimicrobial selective pressure, and minimal interaction with humans and
domestic animals. Results: The study determined mecA gene homology and the
phylogenetic relatedness with mecA described in Staphylococcus sciuri, which was 
the major Staphylococcus spp. cultured from the birds. Our findings corroborate
in silico assumptions that the mecA gene in MRSA strains clinically relevant for 
humans and animals originates from S. sciuri ancestors. Conclusion:
Coagulase-negative staphylococci seem to be natural reservoirs of
methicillin-resistant genes to S. aureus, even in environments with very low
antimicrobial selection pressure.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2020.0189 
PMID: 32816627 

