
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Sep 17;149:104513. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104513. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Antimicrobial and antibiofilm activity of the benzoquinone oncocalyxone A.

da Silva RE(1), Ribeiro FOS(2), de Carvalho AMA(3), Daboit TC(3), Marinho-Filho
JDB(4), Matos TS(5), Pessoa ODL(5), de Souza de Almeida Leite JR(2), de Araújo
AR(6), Dos Santos Soares MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Research in Medicinal Plants - NPPM, Federal University of Piauí -
UFPI, Teresina, Piauí, Brazil.
(2)Biotechnology and Biodiversity Center Research - BIOTEC, Federal University of
Delta do Parnaíba - UFDPar, Parnaíba, Piauí, Brazil; Center for Research in
Applied Morphology and Immunology, NuPMIA, University of Brasilia, Brasilia,
Brazil.
(3)Group of Advanced Studies in Medical Mycology - GEAMICOL, Federal University
of Delta do Parnaíba - UFDPar, Parnaíba, Piauí, Brazil.
(4)Delta Cell Culture Laboratory - LCCDelta, Federal University of Delta do
Parnaíba - UFDPar, Parnaíba, Piauí, Brazil.
(5)Department of Organic and Inorganic Chemistry, Federal University of Ceará -
UFC, Fortaleza, Ceará, Brazil.
(6)Biotechnology and Biodiversity Center Research - BIOTEC, Federal University of
Delta do Parnaíba - UFDPar, Parnaíba, Piauí, Brazil. Electronic address:
alyne.rdearaujo@gmail.com.

Resistance to antimicrobials is a challenging issue that complicates the
treatment of infections caused by bacteria and fungi, thus requiring new
therapeutic options. Oncocalyxone A, a benzoquinone obtained from Auxemma
oncocalyx (Allem) Taub has several biological effects; however, there is no data 
on its antimicrobial action. In this study, its antimicrobial and antibiofilm
activities were evaluated against bacteria and fungi of clinical interest.
Strains of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, and filamentous fungi and
yeasts were selected to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and 
minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of oncocalyxone A. The antibacterial
effect of oncocalyxone A was studied using survival curves, atomic force
microscopy (AFM), and the involvement of oxidative stress. We examined the
inhibitory action of the molecule on biofilm formation and its hemolytic activity
against human erythrocytes. Our results showed that among the strains tested,
Staphylococcus epidermidis was highly sensitive to the action of oncocalyxone A, 
with an MIC of 9.43 μg/mL. In most bacterial strains analyzed, a bacteriostatic
effect was observed, though the molecule showed no antifungal activity.
Antibiofilm activity was observed against the methicillin-resistant S. aureus
bacteria. Additionally, results from atomic force microscopy imaging showed that 
oncocalyxone A significantly altered bacterial morphology. Further, oncocalyxone 
A showed no hemolytic activity at concentrations ≥151 μg/mL. Together, our
results demonstrate the antibacterial and antibiofilm potential of oncocalyxone
A, indicating its therapeutic potential against bacterial resistance.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.104513 
PMID: 32950640 

