
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Jul 29;11:1626. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01626. eCollection 
2020.

Novel Antimicrobial Cellulose Fleece Inhibits Growth of Human-Derived
Biofilm-Forming Staphylococci During the SIRIUS19 Simulated Space Mission.

Wischer D(1), Schneider D(2), Poehlein A(2), Herrmann F(1), Oruc H(1), Meinhardt 
J(1), Wagner O(3), Ahmed R(3), Kharin S(4), Novikova N(4), Haag R(3), Daniel
R(2), Grohmann E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences and Technology, Department of Microbiology, Beuth
University of Applied Sciences, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Genomic and Applied Microbiology, Göttingen Genomics Laboratory,
Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Georg-August-University Göttingen,
Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.
(4)Institute of Biomedical Problems (IBMP), Moscow, Russia.

Two novel antimicrobial surface coatings were assessed for their lasting
antibacterial effect under simulated space conditions during the SIRIUS-19 study.
Because long-term space travel can affect the human immune system, astronauts are
particularly susceptible to infectious disease. Moreover, the space flight
environment can alter the composition of microbial communities within the
spacecraft and increase bacterial virulence and resistance to antibiotics. In
addition to protecting the crew from infection by human pathogens, prevention and
elimination of bacterial contamination is important to avoid corrosion and damage
of the technical equipment. The antimicrobial coating AGXX® consists of
micro-galvanic cells composed of silver and ruthenium which damage bacterial
cells through the release of reactive oxygen species. Over the last years,
several studies on the antimicrobial effect of AGXX® have demonstrated an
effective inhibition of growth and even complete elimination of many pathogenic
bacteria - including multiresistant microorganisms - as well as their biofilms.
The second antimicrobial coating, GOX, consists of chemically modified graphene
oxide. Through a positive surface charge and its flexible scaffold, GOX can
multivalently bind and immobilize bacteria via electrostatic attraction. Here,
AGXX® and GOX were applied to non-metallic carriers not previously tested. The
antimicrobial coated materials, as well as uncoated control samples, were exposed
in the SIRIUS artificial space module and analyzed at different time points
during the 4-months isolation study. Survival and growth of airborne
heterotrophic, aerobic bacteria on the surfaces were assessed by
cultivation-based methods, employing growth conditions suitable for potential
human pathogens. Human-associated, biofilm-forming Staphylococcus spp. (S.
hominis, S. haemolyticus, and S. epidermidis) strongly dominated at all time
points, most were resistant against erythromycin, kanamycin, and ampicillin.
AGXX® coatings completely inhibited growth of these opportunistic pathogens on
all tested surface materials. Particularly, AGXX®-cellulose fleece achieved a
clear reduction in bacterial load able to recover post contact. GOX-cellulose
fleece effectively immobilized bacteria. Sequence analysis of 16S rRNA gene
amplicons revealed that the isolated Staphylococcus spp. did not dominate the
overall bacterial community, accounting for only 0.1-0.4% of all sequences.
Instead, molecular data revealed Lactobacillus, Comamonas, Pseudomonas,
Sporosarcina, and Bacillus as the dominant genera across all samples and time
points.

Copyright © 2020 Wischer, Schneider, Poehlein, Herrmann, Oruc, Meinhardt, Wagner,
Ahmed, Kharin, Novikova, Haag, Daniel and Grohmann.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.01626 
PMCID: PMC7405646
PMID: 32849336 

