
1. J Hosp Infect. 2020 Oct 1. pii: S0195-6701(20)30454-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jhin.2020.09.029. [Epub ahead of print]

A persistent recurring cluster of meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) colonisations in a special care baby unit: a matched case-control study.

Love NK(1), Pichon B(2), Padfield S(3), Hughes GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)UK Field Epidemiology Training Programme, Public Health England, London,
United Kingdom; Field Service, North East, And Yorkshire & Humber, National
Infection Service, Public Health England, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: Nicola.love@phe.gov.uk.
(2)National Infection Service, Public Health England, Healthcare Associated
Infection - Antimicrobial Resistance, Staphylococcus Reference Section, London,
United Kingdom.
(3)Public Health England, Yorkshire and Humber, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(4)Field Service, North East, And Yorkshire & Humber, National Infection Service,
Public Health England, Leeds, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Between August 2016 and November 2019, a cluster of babies colonised 
with meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was reported in a special 
care baby unit in Northern England.
AIM: A case-control study was performed to identify the source and prevent
further cases.
METHODS: Cases were admitted neonates colonised or infected with MRSA (spa-type
t316). A retrospective case-control study was performed with two matched controls
per case. Exposures were determined by medical record review. Cases were compared
with controls using conditional logistic regression. Environmental investigations
and staff screening were undertaken.
FINDINGS: Thirty-one colonised cases were identified across the three-year
period, with no infections reported. Thirteen of the 31 cases were sequenced and 
were within a 25-SNP cluster, consistent with exposure to a common source over a 
prolonged period. Most MRSA cases had a prior negative screen (n=22; 71%).
Environmental sampling and staff screening was performed on several occasions. In
the analytical study, 31 cases were compared with 62 controls. One ward location 
and one healthcare worker were identified as significant exposures in the
multivariable analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the sporadic nature of the colonisations it was hypothesised 
that MRSA was being introduced intermittently, likely by a colonised healthcare
worker, with possible transmission between infants also occurring within each
temporal cluster. It is recommended that transiently colonised healthcare workers
be considered as an MRSA source during outbreaks. This study highlights the
importance of analytic epidemiological studies in persistent outbreaks of MRSA.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2020.09.029 
PMID: 33011307 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

