
1. Chem Biol Drug Des. 2020 Jun 20. doi: 10.1111/cbdd.13706. [Epub ahead of print]

Multimeric TAT peptides are effective in vitro inhibitors of Staphylococcus
saprophyticus.

Chiongson JBV(1)(2), Sabido EM(3), Lin KG(4), Alea GV(1), Dalisay DS(5), Wu
SH(6), Saludes JP(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Science, De La Salle University, Manila,
Philippines.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Physics, College of Liberal Arts, Sciences and
Education, University of San Agustin, Iloilo City, Philippines.
(3)Center for Natural Drug Discovery and Development (CND3), University of San
Agustin, Iloilo City, Philippines.
(4)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Center for Chemical Biology and Biotechnology (C2B2), University of San
Agustin, Iloilo City, Philippines.
(6)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

TAT (48-60) is a tridecapeptide from the envelope protein of HIV that was
previously shown to possess cell-penetrating properties and antibacterial
activity, making it a potential drug delivery agent for anticancer drugs and as
antibacterial compound. Previous reports indicated that dimerization enhances the
desired bioactivity of TAT; hence, we sought to synthesize multimeric TAT
peptides. Herein, we describe the effects of multimerization on the antibacterial
activity and secondary structure of the peptide. Terminal modifications such as
N-acetylation and C-amidation were employed in the design. TATp monomer, dimer,
and tetramer were synthesized using solid-phase peptide synthesis, purified by
reversed-phase HPLC, and then characterized by mass spectrometry. Multimerization
of the peptide did not change the secondary structure conformation. The CD
analysis revealed a polyproline-II conformation for all peptide designs. Thus,
this study provides a method of increasing the biological activity of the peptide
by multimerization while retaining the secondary conformation of its monomeric
unit. Furthermore, the bacteria Staphylococcus saprophyticus was found to be
susceptible to the dimer and tetramer, with MIC50 of 12.50 μm and <1.56 μm,
respectively. This suggests a structure-activity relationship whereby the
antibacterial activity increases with increase in valency.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cbdd.13706 
PMID: 32562357 

