
1. Cureus. 2020 Jun 24;12(6):e8801. doi: 10.7759/cureus.8801.

Staphylococcus lugdunensis: Review of Epidemiology, Complications, and Treatment.

Parthasarathy S(1), Shah S(1), Raja Sager A(2), Rangan A(2), Durugu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biology, The College of New Jersey, Ewing, USA.
(2)Internal Medicine, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Belgaum, IND.
(3)Internal Medicine, University of Louisville, Louisville, USA.

Staphylococcus lugdunensis is a species of coagulase-negative staphylococci (CNS)
that induces a variety of infectious diseases, including skin and soft tissue
infection (SSTI), infective endocarditis (IE), and bone and PJI. This review
article underscores the important points in the literature about S. lugdunensis
infections, including its epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment, as well as
specific types of infections it can cause. Anatomical and age-related
distributions of S. lugdunensis SSTIs have been noted, though they most commonly 
occur as abscesses. S. lugdunensis can also manifest as an aggressive form of
IE presenting with valve destruction and abscess formation, frequently requiring 
surgery and with a high mortality rate. Bone and joint infections caused by S.
lugdunensis are also more invasive than infections by other species of CNS. The
clinical presentation of S. lugdunensis infection in SSTI, IE, and bone/joint
infection is frequently more similar to that of S. aureus infection than that of 
other CNS infections, necessitating species-level differentiation of CNS for
proper diagnosis. Though historically, this depended upon biochemical tests that 
were neither routine nor reliable, the implementation of matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) in clinical
laboratories has made identification of CNS species such as S. lugdunensis more
practical. Imaging modalities, especially the fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) with
positron emission tomography (PET), are another important emerging trend in the
diagnosis of infectious diseases such as S. lugdunensis infection. S. lugdunensis
remains highly susceptible to a wide gamut of antibacterial therapies, which is
uncharacteristic of other CNS. Infections can usually be treated by antibiotics
traditionally used for CNS such as oxacillin. The breakpoints for S. lugdunensis 
are higher than those of other CNS and similar to S. aureus breakpoints. In the
case of aggressive IE or bone/joint infection by S. lugdunensis, it is
recommended to treat with a β-lactam agent. Further study is needed to understand
the diversity, virulence, and population structure of this species, as well as
its role in other infections, such as urinary tract infections (UTIs),
respiratory infections, peritonitis, and bacteremia.

Copyright © 2020, Parthasarathy et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.8801 
PMCID: PMC7325404
PMID: 32617242 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

