
1. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2019 Oct 27;17(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s12958-019-0531-6.

Contraceptive efficacy of sperm agglutinating factor from Staphylococcus warneri,
isolated from the cervix of a woman with inexplicable infertility.

Pant NC(1), Singh R(1), Gupta V(1), Chauhan A(1), Mavuduru R(2), Prabha V(1),
Sharma P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, South Campus, Basic Medical Science (Block I),
Panjab University, Sector 25, Chandigarh, 160014, India.
(2)Department of Urology, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, South Campus, Basic Medical Science (Block I),
Panjab University, Sector 25, Chandigarh, 160014, India. princess@pu.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Voluntary control of fertility is of paramount importance to the
modern society. But since the contraceptive methods available for women have
their limitations such as urinary tract infections, allergies, cervical erosion
and discomfort, a desperate need exists to develop safe methods. Vaginal
contraceptives may be the answer to this problem, as these are the oldest ways of
fertility regulation, practiced over the centuries. With minimal systemic
involvement, these are also the safest. Natural substances blocking or impairing 
the sperm motility offer as valuable non-cytotoxic vaginal contraceptives.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) isolated from plants, animals and microorganisms
are known to possess sperm immobilizing and spermicidal properties. Following
this, in the quest for alternative means, we have cloned, over expressed and
purified the recombinant sperm agglutinating factor (SAF) from Staphylococcus
warneri, isolated from the cervix of a woman with unexplained infertility.
METHODS: Genomic library of Staphylococcus warneri was generated in Escherichia
coli using pSMART vector and screened for sperm agglutinating factor (SAF). The
insert in sperm agglutinating transformant was sequenced and was found to express
ribonucleotide-diphosphate reductase-α sub unit. The ORF was sub-cloned in pET28a
vector, expressed and purified. The effect of rSAF on motility, viability,
morphology, Mg++-dependent ATPase activity and acrosome status of human sperms
was analyzed in vitro and contraceptive efficacy was evaluated in vivo in female 
BALB/c mice.
RESULTS: The 80 kDa rSAF showed complete sperm agglutination, inhibited its
Mg2+-ATPase activity, caused premature sperm acrosomal loss in vitro and mimicked
the pattern in vivo showing 100% contraception in BALB/c mice resulting in
prevention of pregnancy. The FITC labeled SAF was found to bind the entire
surface of spermatozoa. Vaginal application and oral administration of rSAF to
mice for 14 successive days did not demonstrate any significant change in vaginal
cell morphology, organ weight and tissue histology of reproductive and
non-reproductive organs and had no negative impact in the dermal and penile
irritation tests.
CONCLUSION: The Sperm Agglutinating Factor from Staphylococcus warneri, natural
microflora of human cervix, showed extensive potential to be employed as a safe
vaginal contraceptive.

DOI: 10.1186/s12958-019-0531-6 
PMCID: PMC6815424
PMID: 31656198  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

