
1. Microsc Res Tech. 2020 Sep 26. doi: 10.1002/jemt.23604. [Epub ahead of print]

Populus ciliata mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles and their
antibacterial activity.

Hafeez M(1), Zeb M(1), Khan A(2), Akram B(3), Abdin ZU(1), Haq S(1), Zaheer M(4),
Ali S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir, Muzaffarabad,
Azad Kashmir, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Environmental Sciences, QAU, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, LUMS, Lahore, Pakistan.
(5)Applied Entomology and Medical Toxicology Laboratory, Government College
University, Lahore, Pakistan.

Design and synthesis of bactericidal and fungicidal agents is very important to
protect human beings from different diseases. Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs)
possess good bactericidal properties. Synthesis of these nanoparticles (NPs) via 
green route is cost-effective and environmentally harmonious as compared to the
chemical and physical approaches. In this work, AgNPs were synthesized through
green synthesis method using Populus ciliata leaf extract. The synthesized AgNPs 
were characterized by x-ray diffraction (XRD), ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis)
spectroscopy, Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy, scanning electron 
microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and energy dispersive
x-ray (EDX) techniques. The XRD pattern depicted the characteristic Bragg's peaks
of (111), (200), (220), and (311) planes which are the features of face centered 
cubic (FCC) geometry of the synthesized AgNPs. TEM micrographs revealed the
spherical shaped particles having average size of 4 nm. The AgNPs showed
inhibitory effects against selected gram positive (Staphylococcus epidermidis and
Streptococcus pyogenes) and gram negative bacteria (Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Serratia marcescens, and Pseudomonas pseudoalcaligenes). The maximum zone of
inhibition (26 mm) was observed for gram negative bacterium (Serratia marcescens)
when 25 mg/ml solution of AgNPs was used and for similar concentration of these
NPs, the maximum zone of inhibition (25 mm) was observed against gram positive
bacteria (S. pyogenes). The results indicated good bactericidal potential of the 
synthesized AgNPs. RESEARCH HIGHLIGHTS: Populus ciliata leaf extract mediated
synthesis of AgNPs. Transmission electron microscopy analysis revealed very small
size of the synthesized AgNPs (4 nm). The synthesized AgNPs were found very
effective against various bacterial pathogens.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jemt.23604 
PMID: 32979017 

