
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 May 13;11:920. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00920. eCollection
2020.

Hyperosmotic Infusion and Oxidized Surfaces Are Essential for Biofilm Formation
of Staphylococcus capitis From the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.

Qu Y(1)(2)(3), Li Y(4)(5), Cameron DR(2), Easton CD(4), Zhu X(1), Zhu M(1),
Salwiczek M(2)(4), Muir BW(4), Thissen H(4), Daley A(6)(7), Forsythe JS(5), Peleg
AY(2)(3), Lithgow T(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, The Second Affiliated Hospital and Yuying
Children's Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, China.
(2)Infection and Immunity Theme, Department of Microbiology, Biomedicine
Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Alfred Hospital and Central Clinical
School, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(4)The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO)
Manufacturing, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(5)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash Institute of Medical
Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(6)Department of Microbiology, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Staphylococcus capitis is an opportunistic pathogen often implicated in
bloodstream infections in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). This is
assisted by its ability to form biofilms on indwelling central venous catheters
(CVC), which are highly resistant to antibiotics and the immune system. We sought
to understand the fundamentals of biofilm formation by S. capitis in the NICU,
using seventeen clinical isolates including the endemic NRCS-A clone and
assessing nine commercial and two modified polystyrene surfaces. S. capitis
clinical isolates from the NICU initiated biofilm formation only in response to
hyperosmotic conditions, followed by a developmental progression driven by
icaADBC expression to establish mature biofilms, with polysaccharide being their 
major extracellular polymer substance (EPS) matrix component. Physicochemical
features of the biomaterial surface, and in particular the level of the element
oxygen present on the surface, significantly influenced biofilm development of S.
capitis. A lack of highly oxidized carbon species on the surface prevented the
immobilization of S. capitis EPS and the formation of mature biofilms. This
information provides guidance in regard to the preparation of hyperosmolar total 
parenteral nutrition and the engineering of CVC surfaces that can minimize the
risk of catheter-related bloodstream infections caused by S. capitis in the NICU.

Copyright © 2020 Qu, Li, Cameron, Easton, Zhu, Zhu, Salwiczek, Muir, Thissen,
Daley, Forsythe, Peleg and Lithgow.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00920 
PMCID: PMC7237634
PMID: 32477314 

