
1. Microb Drug Resist. 2020 May;26(5):520-530. doi: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0114. Epub 2019
Nov 21.

Enterotoxigenicity and Antibiotic Resistance of Coagulase-Negative Staphylococci 
Isolated from Raw Buffalo and Cow Milk.

Osman KM(1), Pires ÁDS(2), Franco OL(2)(3)(4), Orabi A(1), Hanafy MH(1), Marzouk 
E(5), Hussien H(6), Alzaben FA(7)(8), Almuzaini AM(7), Elbehiry A(5)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University, 
Giza, Egypt.
(2)Pós-Graduação em Ciências Genômicas e Biotecnologia, Centro de Análises
Proteômicas e Bioquímicas, Universidade Católica de Brasília, Brasília, Brazil.
(3)Programa de Pós-Graduação em Biotecnologia, S-Inova Biotech, Universidade
Católica Dom Bosco, Campo Grande, Brazil.
(4)Graduação em Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Católica Dom Bosco, Campo
Grande, Brazil.
(5)Department of Public Health, College of Public Health and Health Informatics, 
Qassim University, Buraydah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Food Hygiene and Control, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Sadat City, Sadat City, Egypt.
(7)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Agriculture and Veterinary
Medicine, Qassim University, Buraydah, Saudi Arabia.
(8)Department of Preventive Medicine, King Fahad Armed Forces Hospital, Jeddah
City, Saudi Arabia.
(9)Department of Bacteriology, Mycology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Sadat City, Sadat City, Egypt.

Staphylococcal food poisoning is considered to be one of the most common
foodborne illnesses worldwide. Because milk is rich in nutrients and its neutral 
pH, it leads to the growth of various bacteria. To date, the correlation between 
enterotoxigenic potential in Staphylococcus species and antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR), using bioinformatics analysis in buffalo and cow raw milk and the possible
health risks from these bacteria, has not been examined in Egypt. A total of 42
Staphylococcus isolates representing 12 coagulase-positive staphylococci
(Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus intermedius) and 30 coagulase-negative 
staphylococci (Staphylococcus capitis, Staphylococcus xylosus, Staphylococcus
carnosus, Staphylococcus saccharolyticus, and Staphylococcus auricularis) were
isolated. An assay of the antimicrobial resistance phenotypes indicated low
resistance against vancomycin (9.5%). The blaZ gene was associated with
penicillin G and methicillin resistance and not with sulbactam + ampicillin. The 
presence of the gene ermB presented the correlation with erythromycin resistance 
and tetK with tetracycline resistance (correlation index: 0.57 and 0.49,
respectively), despite the absence of the same behavior for ermC and tetM,
respectively. Interestingly, the gene mecA was not correlated with resistance to 
methicillin or any other β-lactam. Correlation showed that slime-producing
isolates had more resistance to antibiotics than those of nonslime producers. The
multiple correlations between antibiotic resistance phenotypes and resistance
genes indicate a complex nature of resistance in Staphylococcus species. The
antimicrobial resistance could potentially spread to the community and thus, the 
resistance of Staphylococcus species to various antibiotics does not depend only 
on the use of a single antimicrobial, but also extends to other unrelated classes
of antimicrobials.

DOI: 10.1089/mdr.2019.0114 
PMID: 31750778 

