
1. Ann Transl Med. 2020 Aug;8(16):987. doi: 10.21037/atm-20-4901.

Improved osteogenic activity and inhibited bacterial biofilm formation on
andrographolide-loaded titania nanotubes.

Feng E(1), Shen K(1), Lin F(1), Lin W(1), Zhang T(1), Zhang Y(1), Lin F(2), Yang 
Y(3), Lin C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Arthrosis Surgery, Fuzhou Second Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen
University, Teaching Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Fuzhou Second Hospital Affiliated to Xiamen
University, Teaching Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Research Institute for Biomimetics and Soft Matter, Fujian Provincial Key
Laboratory for Soft Functional Materials Research, College of Physical Science
and Technology, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, and Department
of Chemistry, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University,
Xiamen, China.

Background: Delivery of local drugs with a titania nanotube is an attractive
approach to combat implant-related infection. Our earlier study has confirmed
that nanotubes loaded with gentamicin could significantly improve the
antibacterial ability. On this basis, the used andrographolide in this paper has 
a high antibacterial activity, which cannot only avoid the evolution of
antibiotic-resistant bacteria but also has simultaneously excellent
biocompatibility with osteogenic cells.
Methods: Two mg of andrographolide was loaded into titania nanotubes, which were 
fabricated into different diameters (50 and 100 nm) and 200 nm length by the
method of lyophilization and vacuum drying. We chose a standard strain,
Staphylococcus epidermidis (American Type Culture Collection 35984), and two
clinical isolates, S. aureus 376 and S. epidermidis 389 to research the bacterial
adhesion at 6, 12 and 24 hours and biofilm formation at 48, and 72 hours on the
andrographolide-loaded nanotubes (NT-A) using the diffusion plate method. Smooth 
titanium (smooth Ti) and nanotubes with no drug loading (NT) were also inclusive 
and analyzed. Furthermore, the Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats mesenchymal stem cells
were used to assess the influence of nanotubular topographies on the osteogenic
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.
Results: Our results showed that NT-A could inhibit bacterial adhesion and
biofilm formation on implant surfaces. NT-A and NT, especially those with 100 nm 
diameters, were found to significantly promoted cell attachment, proliferation,
diffusion, and osteogenic differentiation when compared with smooth Ti, while the
same diameter in NT-A and NT did not differ.
Conclusions: Titania nanotube modification and andrographolide loading can
significantly improve the antibacterial ability and osteogenic activity of
orthopedic implants. Nanotubes-based local delivery could be a promising strategy
for combating implant-associated infection.

2020 Annals of Translational Medicine. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21037/atm-20-4901 
PMCID: PMC7475475
PMID: 32953787 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: All authors have completed
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form (available at
http://dx.doi.org/10.21037/atm-20-4901). The authors have no conflicts of
interest to declare.

