
1. Front Microbiol. 2020 Aug 19;11:2036. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02036. eCollection 
2020.

Exposure to a Manuka Honey Wound Gel Is Associated With Changes in Bacterial
Virulence and Antimicrobial Susceptibility.

Mokhtar JA(1)(2), McBain AJ(1), Ledder RG(1), Binsuwaidan R(1), Rimmer V(1),
Humphreys GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health,
School of Health Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United
Kingdom.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.

The use of manuka honey for the topical treatment of wounds has increased
worldwide owing to its broad spectrum of activity towards bacteria in both
planktonic and biofilm growth modes. Despite this, the potential consequences of 
bacterial exposure to manuka honey, as may occur during the treatment of chronic 
wounds, are not fully understood. Here, we describe changes in antimicrobial
susceptibility and virulence in a panel of bacteria, including wound isolates,
following repeated exposure (ten passages) to sub-inhibitory concentrations of a 
manuka honey based wound gel. Changes in antibiotic sensitivity above 4-fold were
predominantly related to increased vancomycin sensitivity in the staphylococci.
Interestingly, Staphylococcus epidermidis displayed phenotypic resistance to
erythromycin following passaging, with susceptibility profiles returning to
baseline in the absence of further honey exposure. Changes in susceptibility to
the tested wound gel were moderate (≤ 1-fold) when compared to the respective
parent strain. In sessile communities, increased biofilm eradication
concentrations over 4-fold occurred in a wound isolate of Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
(WIBG 2.2) as evidenced by a 7-fold reduction in gentamicin sensitivity following
passaging. With regards to pathogenesis, 4/8 bacteria exhibited enhanced
virulence following honey wound gel exposure. In the pseudomonads and S.
epidermidis, this occurred in conjunction with increased haemolysis and biofilm
formation, whilst P. aeruginosa also exhibited increased pyocyanin production.
Where virulence attenuation was noted in a passaged wound isolate of S. aureus
(WIBG 1.6), this was concomitant to delayed coagulation and reduced haemolytic
potential. Overall, passaging in the presence of a manuka honey wound gel led to 
changes in antimicrobial sensitivity and virulence that varied between test
bacteria.

Copyright © 2020 Mokhtar, McBain, Ledder, Binsuwaidan, Rimmer and Humphreys.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.02036 
PMCID: PMC7466559
PMID: 32973735 

