
1. Braz J Microbiol. 2020 Jun 2. doi: 10.1007/s42770-020-00304-2. [Epub ahead of
print]

Protein signatures to identify the different genera within the Xanthomonadaceae
family.

Cutiño-Jiménez AM(1), Menck CFM(2), Cambas YT(3), Díaz-Pérez JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Studies for Industrial Biotechnology (CEBI), Faculty of Natural and 
Exact Sciences, University of Oriente, Ave. Patricio Lumumba s/n., Reparto
Jiménez, CP 90500, Santiago de Cuba, Cuba. aniacutino@uo.edu.cu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1374, São Paulo, SP, 05508-000, Brazil.
(3)Department of Biology and Geography, Faculty of Natural and Exact Sciences,
University of Oriente, Ave. Patricio Lumumba s/n., Reparto Jiménez, CP 90500,
Santiago de Cuba, Cuba.
(4)Department of Horticulture, University of Georgia, Tifton, GA, 31793, USA.

The Xanthomonadaceae family comprises the genera Xanthomonas and Xylella, which
include plant pathogenic species that affect economically important crops. The
family also includes the plant growth-promoting bacteria Pseudomonas geniculata
and Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, and some other species with biotechnological,
medical, and environmental relevance. Previous work identified molecular
signatures that helped to understand the evolutionary placement of this family
within gamma-proteobacteria. In the present study, we investigated whether
insertions identified in highly conserved proteins may also be used as molecular 
markers for taxonomic classification and identification of members within the
Xanthomonadaceae family. Four housekeeping proteins (DNA repair and
replication-related and protein translation enzymes) were selected. The
insertions allowed discriminating phytopathogenic and plant growth-promoting
groups within this family, and also amino acid sequences of these insertions
allowed distinguishing different genera and, eventually, species as well as
pathovars. Moreover, insertions in the proteins MutS and DNA polymerase III
(subunit alpha) are conserved in Xylella fastidiosa, but signatures in DNA ligase
NAD-dependent and Valyl tRNA synthetase distinguish particular subspecies within 
the genus. The genus Stenotrophomonas and Pseudomonas geniculata could be
distinguishable based on the insertions in MutS, DNA polymerase III (subunit
alpha), and Valyl tRNA synthetase, although insertion in DNA ligase NAD-dependent
discriminates these bacteria at the species level. All these insertions
differentiate species and pathovars within Xanthomonas. Thus, the insertions
presented support evolutionary demarcation within Xanthomonadaceae and provide
tools for the fast identification in the field of these bacteria with
agricultural, environmental, and economic relevance.

DOI: 10.1007/s42770-020-00304-2 
PMID: 32488841 

