
1. Cancer Sci. 2020 Sep 5. doi: 10.1111/cas.14641. [Epub ahead of print]

Icaritin-induced immunomodulatory efficacy in advanced hepatitis B virus-related 
hepatocellular carcinoma: Immunodynamic biomarkers and overall survival.

Qin SK(1), Li Q(2), Ming Xu J(3), Liang J(4), Cheng Y(5), Fan Y(2), Jiang J(2),
Ye H(6), Tao H(7), Li L(7), Zheng L(7), Wei Z(8), Li S(9), Meng K(9), Ye B(9),
Sun Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Oncology Department, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center, Cancer Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China.
(3)The 5th Medical Centre, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.
(4)Clinical Oncology Department, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University,
Qingdao, China.
(5)Clinical Oncology Department, Jilin Cancer Hospital, Changchun, China.
(6)Research & Development Department, SinoTech Genomics, Shanghai, China.
(7)School of Life Science, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Biostatistical Department, Tigermed Consulting Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China.
(9)Research & Clinical Development, Shenogen Pharma Group, Beijing, China.

Advanced hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinoma HCC with poor
prognosis is often associated with chronic inflammation, immune tolerance, and
marked heterogeneity. The interleukin-6 (IL-6)/JAK/STAT3 signal pathways play
multiple regulatory roles in modulating inflammation and immunity in cancers.
Polarization of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) is involved in
HBV-related immunosuppression and CD8+ T-cell activation through ERK/IL-6/STAT3. 
Icaritin is a small molecule that has displayed anticancer activities through
IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathways in tumor cells and immune cells including CD8+ T cells,
MDSCs, neutrophils, and macrophages. This study aimed to confirm icaritin
immunomodulation in advanced HBV-related HCC patients with poor prognosis.
Immunomodulation of MDSCs was evaluated in BALB/c mice in vivo. Immunomodulation 
of serum cytokines and a panel of immune checkpoint proteins were assessed in
HBV-related, histologically confirmed HCC patients. Poor prognostic
characteristics included HBV infection, bulky tumors, Child-Pugh B
classification, and metastasis. Clinical end-points included safety, tumor
response, and overall survival (OS). Icaritin treatment-induced dynamics of serum
cytokines IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, and tumor necrosis factor-α, and soluble immune
checkpoint proteins TIM3, LAG3, CD28, CD80, and CTLA-4 were assessed. No grade
III/IV treatment-related adverse events were observed. Time-to-progression was
significantly associated with the prognostic factors. Improved survival was
observed in the advanced HCC patients with dynamic changes of cytokines, immune
checkpoint proteins, and immune cells. Median OS (329-565 days) was significantly
correlated with baseline hepatitis B surface antigen positivity, cytokines, tumor
neoantigens, and Stenotrophomonas maltophilia infection. Composite biomarker
scores of high-level α-fetoprotein and T helper type I (Th1)/Th2 cytokines
associated with favorable survival warrant further clinical development of
icaritin as an alternative immune-modulatory regimen to treat advanced HCC
patients with poor prognosis.

© 2020 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

DOI: 10.1111/cas.14641 
PMID: 32889778 

