
1. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 Sep 14. pii: AAC.00297-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00297-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Activity of aztreonam in combination with avibactam, clavulanate, relebactam, and
vaborbactam against multidrug resistant Stenotrophomonas maltophilia.

Biagi M(1), Lamm D(1), Meyer K(1), Vialichka A(1), Jurkovic M(1), Patel S(1),
Mendes RE(2), Bulman ZP(1), Wenzler E(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)JMI Laboratories, North Liberty, IA, USA.
(3)College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
wenzler@uic.edu.

The intrinsic L1 metallo- and L2 serine-β-lactamases in Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia make it naturally multidrug resistant and difficult to treat. There
is a need to identify novel treatment strategies for this pathogen, especially
against isolates resistant to first line agents. Aztreonam in combination with
avibactam has demonstrated potential, although data on other
aztreonam-β-lactamase inhibitor (BLI) combinations are lacking. Additionally,
molecular mechanisms for reduced susceptibility to these combinations have not
been explored. The objectives of this study were to evaluate and compare the in
vitro activity and understand the mechanisms of resistance to aztreonam in
combination with avibactam, clavulanate, relebactam, and vaborbactam against S.
maltophilia. A panel of 47 clinical S. maltophilia strains non-susceptible to
levofloxacin and/or trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole were tested against each
aztreonam-BLI combination via broth microdilution and 6 isolates were then
evaluated in time-kill analyses. Three isolates with varying aztreonam-BLI MICs
were subjected to whole-genome sequencing and quantitative reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction. Avibactam restored aztreonam susceptibility in 98% of 
aztreonam-resistant isolates, compared to 61%, 71%, and 15% with clavulanate,
relebactam, and vaborbactam, respectively. The addition of avibactam to aztreonam
resulted in a ≥2 log10 CFU/mL decrease at 24 hours vs. aztreonam alone against
5/6 isolates compared to 1/6 with clavulanate, 4/6 with relebactam, and 2/6 with 
vaborbactam. Molecular analyses revealed that decreased susceptibility to
aztreonam-avibactam was associated with increased expression of genes encoding
for L1, L2, and the efflux pump smeABC Aztreonam-avibactam is the most promising 
BLI-combination against multidrug resistant S. maltophilia. Decreased
susceptibility may be due to the combination of overexpressed β-lactamases and
efflux pumps. Further studies evaluating this combination against S. maltophilia 
are warranted.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00297-20 
PMID: 32928733 

