
1. Integr Environ Assess Manag. 2020 Jun;16(4):461-471. doi: 10.1002/ieam.4259. Epub
2020 Apr 6.

Evaluation of Environmental Pollution and Microbial Treatment of Shallow
Groundwater in El Omayed Area, Egypt.

Hagagg K(1), Hosny M(2), Hussien R(1), Rahman MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Egyptian Nuclear and Radiological Regulatory Authority (ENRRA), Cairo, Egypt.
(2)Egyptian Petroleum Research Institute (EPRI), Nasr City, Egypt.

In the last few years, the northwestern coastal zone of Egypt has been affected
by many stresses that impact its water resources, leading to undesirable
consequences related to water quantity and quality. This paper aims to evaluate
the possible contamination sources of shallow aquifers in the El-Omayed area,
Egypt, that are causing its deterioration; this was achieved through an
integration of hydrochemical and isotopic techniques, an assessment of the
undesirable consequences of potential toxic metals (PTMs) on human health risk as
a result of direct water consumption, and finally, the application of biological 
treatment in the remediation of some metal contamination. The chemical
composition, environmental isotopes (δ18 O and δ2 H), and microbial analyses were
analyzed from 13 collected water samples. Approximately 20% of the groundwater
samples were classified as fresh water, and the rest were classified as slightly 
saline to moderately saline. Stable isotopes proved the contribution of the El
Sheikh Zoied canal (which is mainly recharged from the Nile system) as a recharge
source. The toxicity of PTMs (Cd, Cu, Co, Cr, Pb, Zn, B, and Fe) was evaluated on
the basis of their exceedance values. It was proven that the majority of the
groundwater samples were contaminated, which might be attributed to natural and
anthropogenic actions in the study area; however, according to human health risk 
exposure assessment calculations, there is no human cancer risk posed via
ingestion of drinking groundwater. The total bacterial count was determined for
all water samples; autochthonous microorganisms were capable of removing heavy
metals in the polluted water sample. The bacterial strain M52, which was
identified by 16S rRNA sequencing as Stenotrophomonas rhizophila, showed the best
results, by removing 75% and 65% of the initial concentrations of Fe and B,
respectively. The results indicate that this bacterial strain may be useful and
represents an environmentally friendly method to remove pollutants and heavy
metals from contaminated water. Integr Environ Assess Manag 2020;16:461-471. ©
2020 SETAC.

© 2020 SETAC.

DOI: 10.1002/ieam.4259 
PMID: 32125096  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

