
1. mSphere. 2020 Sep 30;5(5). pii: e00717-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00717-20.

Antimicrobial Peptide Exposure Selects for Resistant and Fit Stenotrophomonas
maltophilia Mutants That Show Cross-Resistance to Antibiotics.

Blanco P(1), Hjort K(2), Martínez JL(3), Andersson DI(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain jlmtnez@cnb.csic.es
Dan.Andersson@imbim.uu.se.
(4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden jlmtnez@cnb.csic.es Dan.Andersson@imbim.uu.se.

Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are essential components of the innate immune
system and have been proposed as promising therapeutic agents against
drug-resistant microbes. AMPs possess a rapid bactericidal mode of action and can
interact with different targets, but bacteria can also avoid their effect through
a variety of resistance mechanisms. Apart from hampering treatment by the AMP
itself, or that by other antibiotics in the case of cross-resistance, AMP
resistance might also confer cross-resistance to innate human peptides and impair
the anti-infective capability of the human host. A better understanding of how
resistance to AMPs is acquired and the genetic mechanisms involved is needed
before using these compounds as therapeutic agents. Using experimental evolution 
and whole-genome sequencing, we determined the genetic causes and the effect of
acquired de novo resistance to three different AMPs in the opportunistic pathogen
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, a bacterium that is intrinsically resistant to a
wide range of antibiotics. Our results show that AMP exposure selects for
high-level resistance, generally without any reduction in bacterial fitness,
conferred by mutations in different genes encoding enzymes, transporters,
transcriptional regulators, and other functions. Cross-resistance to AMPs and to 
other antibiotic classes not used for selection, as well as collateral
sensitivity, was observed for many of the evolved populations. The relative ease 
by which high-level AMP resistance is acquired, combined with the occurrence of
cross-resistance to conventional antibiotics and the maintained bacterial fitness
of the analyzed mutants, highlights the need for careful studies of S.
maltophilia resistance evolution to clinically valuable AMPs.IMPORTANCE
Stenotrophomonas maltophilia is an increasingly relevant multidrug-resistant
(MDR) bacterium found, for example, in people with cystic fibrosis and associated
with other respiratory infections and underlying pathologies. The infections
caused by this nosocomial pathogen are difficult to treat due to the intrinsic
resistance of this bacterium against a broad number of antibiotics. Therefore,
new treatment options are needed, and considering the growing interest in using
AMPs as alternative therapeutic compounds and the restricted number of
antibiotics active against S. maltophilia, we addressed the potential for
development of AMP resistance, the genetic mechanisms involved, and the
physiological effects that acquisition of AMP resistance has on this
opportunistic pathogen.

Copyright © 2020 Blanco et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00717-20 
PMID: 32999081 

