
1. J Biol Chem. 2020 Aug 20. pii: jbc.RA120.014177. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014177.
[Epub ahead of print]

Tandem sialoglycan-binding modules in a Streptococcus sanguinis serine-rich
repeat adhesin create target dependent avidity effects.

Stubbs HE(1), Bensing BA(2), Yamakawa I(1), Sharma P(3), Yu H(4), Chen X(4),
Sullam PM(5), Iverson TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University, United States.
(2)Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, United States.
(4)University of California, Davis, United States.
(5)Infectious Disease, University of California, San Francisco, United States.

Siglec-like domains of streptococcal serine-rich repeat (SRR) adhesins recognize 
sialylated glycans on human salivary, platelet, and plasma glycoproteins via a
"YTRY" sequence motif. The SRR adhesin from Streptococcus sanguinis strain SK1
has tandem sialoglycan-binding domains and has previously been shown to bind
sialoglycans with high affinity. However, both domains contain substitutions
within the canonical "YTRY" motif, making it unclear how they interact with host 
receptors. To identify how the S. sanguinis strain SK1 SRR adhesin affects
interactions with sialylated glycans and glycoproteins, we determined
high-resolution crystal structures of the binding domains alone and with purified
trisaccharides. These structural studies identify that the ligands still bind at 
the non-canonical binding motif, but with fewer hydrogen-bonding interactions to 
the protein than is observed in structures of other Siglec-like adhesins.
Complementary biochemical studies identify that each of the two binding domains
has a different selectivity profile. Interestingly, the binding of SK1 to
platelets and plasma glycoproteins identifies that the interaction to some host
targets is dominated by the contribution of one binding domain, while the binding
to other host receptors is mediated by both binding domains. These results
provide insight into outstanding questions concerning the roles of tandem domains
in targeting host receptors and suggest mechanisms for how pathogens can adapt to
the availability of a range of related but non-identical host receptors. They
further suggest that the definition of the "YTRY" motif should be changed to
ϕTRX, a more rigorous description of this sialic acid-recognition motif given
recent findings.

Published under license by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA120.014177 
PMID: 32820052 

