
1. J Fish Dis. 2020 Oct;43(10):1229-1236. doi: 10.1111/jfd.13230. Epub 2020 Aug 10.

Cytotoxicity of Streptococcus agalactiae secretory protein on tilapia cultured
cells.

Palang I(1)(2), Hirono I(3), Senapin S(1)(4), Sirimanapong W(5),
Withyachumnarnkul B(6)(7), Vanichviriyakit R(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence for Shrimp Molecular Biology and Biotechnology (Centex
Shrimp), Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.
(3)Laboratory of Genome Science, Graduate School of Marine Science and
Technology, Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science
and Technology Development Agency, Pathumthani, Thailand.
(5)Veterinary Aquatic Animal Research Health Care Unit, Department of Clinical
Sciences and Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Mahidol University,
Bangkok, Thailand.
(6)Faculty of Science and Industrial Technology, Prince of Songkla University,
Surat Thani, Thailand.
(7)AquaAcademy Farm, Surat Thani, Thailand.

Streptococcus agalactiae secrete virulence factors believed to be able of killing
host tissues, especially under elevated water temperature. A direct effect of S. 
agalactiae secretory products on tilapia cells was tested on the tilapia kidney
(TK-1) cell culture. The bacteria were cultured under four different temperature 
levels: 22, 29, 32 and 37°C; the cell-free portion was processed through
SDS-PAGE; and distinct bands were identified by LC-MS/MS. At least, three
virulence factors were identified, Bsp, PcsB and CAMP factor, with increasing
levels as the cultured temperature rose. Expressions of bsp, pcsB and cfb were
also up-regulated with the rising of the temperature in S. agalactiae culture.
The supernatant from the bacteria cultured under specified temperatures was added
into TK-1 cell-cultured wells. Morphological damage and mortality of the cultured
cells, as determined by MTT method, were increased progressively from the
supernatant treatment according to the rise of temperature in S. agalactiae
culture. This study suggests that the production of the three virulence factors
of S. agalactiae reported herein is temperature-dependent, and it is likely that 
CAMP factor directly kills the TK-1 cells since the other two types of protein
are involved in S. agalactiae cell division and the bacterial adherence to host
tissues.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jfd.13230 
PMID: 32974952 

