
1. J Dent Res. 2020 Aug 27:22034520950286. doi: 10.1177/0022034520950286. [Epub
ahead of print]

Cross-Kingdom Cell-to-Cell Interactions in Cariogenic Biofilm Initiation.

Wan SX(1), Tian J(1), Liu Y(1), Dhall A(2), Koo H(1)(3), Hwang G(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Biofilm Research Labs, Levy Center for Oral Health, Department of
Orthodontics, Divisions of Pediatric Dentistry and Community Oral Health, School 
of Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Preventive and Restorative Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Center for Innovation and Precision Dentistry, School of Dental Medicine,
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Candida albicans is known to form polymicrobial biofilms with various
Streptococcus spp., including mitis and mutans group streptococci. Streptococcus 
gordonii (mitis group) has been shown to bind avidly to C. albicans hyphae via
direct cell-to-cell interaction, while the cariogenic pathogen Streptococcus
mutans (mutans group) interacts with the fungal cells via extracellular glucans. 
However, the biophysical properties of these cross-kingdom interactions at the
single-cell level during the early stage of biofilm formation remain
understudied. Here, we examined the binding forces between S. mutans (or S.
gordonii) and C. albicans in the presence and absence of in situ glucans on the
fungal surface using single-cell atomic force microscopy and their influence on
biofilm initiation and subsequent development under cariogenic conditions. The
data show that S. gordonii binding force to the C. albicans surface is
significantly higher than that ofS. mutans to the fungal surface (~2-fold).
However, S. mutans binding forces are dramatically enhanced when the C. albicans 
cell surface is locally coated with extracellular glucans (~6-fold vs. uncoated
C. albicans), which vastly exceeds the forces between S. gordonii andC. albicans.
The enhanced binding affinity of S. mutans to glucan-coated C. albicans resulted 
in a larger structure during early biofilm initiation compared to S. gordonii-C. 
albicans biofilms. Ultimately, this resulted in S. mutans dominance composition
in the 3-species biofilm model under cariogenic conditions. This study provides a
novel biophysical aspect of Candida-streptococcal interaction whereby
extracellular glucans may selectively favor S. mutans binding interactions with
C. albicans during cariogenic biofilm development.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034520950286 
PMID: 32853527 

