
1. ACS Sens. 2020 Jul 24;5(7):1969-1976. doi: 10.1021/acssensors.0c00348. Epub 2020 
Jul 2.

Porous Silicon Fabry-Pérot Interferometer for N-Acetyl-β-d-Glucosaminidase
Biomarker Monitoring.

Kumar DN(1), Pinker N(2), Shtenberg G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Agricultural Engineering, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan
50250, Israel.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot 76100, Israel.

Bovine mastitis (BM) is a prominent inflammatory disease affecting the dairy
industry worldwide, originated by pathogenic agent invasion onto the mammary
gland. Early detection of new BM cases is of high importance for infection
control within the herd. Conventional analytical techniques lack the ability to
detect BM-predicting biomarkers, used as analytical indicators for health status 
evaluation, in real time or outside the laboratory boundaries. Herein, we
describe a biosensing platform for label-free detection and identification of BM 
onset through targeting N-acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase (NAGase) for potential
evidence-based therapy. The lysosomal activity in dissimilar milk qualities was
monitored by a gelatin-functionalized porous Si Fabry-Pérot interferometer, while
estimating the biochemical reaction precipitating products within the
nanostructure. The optical response was proportional to the inherent NAGase
concentration found in real milk samples, influenced by two dominant BM causative
pathogens (i.e., Escherichia coli and Streptococcus dysgalactiae) at various
somatic cell counts. Quantitative analysis of NAGase levels within the entire
inflammatory spectrum (healthy, subclinical, and clinical BM) was obtained within
the range of 1.0-4.2 μM/min (enzymatic activity per volume unit), while
presenting a detection limit of 0.51 μM/min. The optical performances correspond 
with standardized biochemical activity assay in dissimilar milk qualities.
Overall, the presented sensing concept exhibits the potential of BM-predicting
biomarker detection using a simple and portable experimental setup for convenient
early biodiagnostics and health status evaluation.

DOI: 10.1021/acssensors.0c00348 
PMID: 32573203 

