
1. J Cyst Fibros. 2020 Jul;19(4):e28-e31. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2019.11.004. Epub 2019 
Nov 20.

Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae, an opportunistic pathogen in patients with cystic
fibrosis.

Dupont C(1), Michon AL(2), Normandin M(3), Salom G(3), Latypov M(4), Chiron R(5),
Marchandin H(6).

Author information: 
(1)HydroSciences Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, Laboratoire
d'Ecologie Microbienne Hospitalière, Montpellier University Hospital, France.
(2)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Montpellier University Hospital, France.
(3)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, University of Montpellier, France.
(4)Centre de Ressources et de Compétences de la Mucoviscidose, Montpellier
University Hospital, France.
(5)HydroSciences Montpellier, Université de Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, Centre de
Ressources et de Compétences de la Mucoviscidose, Montpellier University
Hospital, France.
(6)HydroSciences Montpellier, CNRS, IRD, University of Montpellier, Department of
Microbiology, Nîmes University Hospital, France. Electronic address:
helene.marchandin@umontpellier.fr.

The pathogenic power of Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae has been specified over
years, particularly in case of chronic respiratory diseases; S. pseudopneumoniae 
isolation has however not been characterized before in CF patients.
Identification of S. pseudopneumoniae remains challenging due to the high
simila-rity level between species of the Streptococcus mitis group. Twenty CF
patients with S. pseudopneumoniae were included. Isolates initially identified by
phenotypic routine methods were subjected to both recA sequencing and
amplification of S. pseudopneumoniae specific markers. Microbiological and
clinical data were reviewed for patients with confirmed S. pseudopneumoniae.
Thirteen isolates actually belong to S. pseudopneumoniae. S. pseudopneumoniae was
associated with pulmonary exacerbation in 46% of the patients, either as the sole
pathogen or as part of a polymicrobial infectious process. S. pseudopneumoniae
has to be considered as an additional opportunistic pathogen in CF and additional
studies are needed to increase knowledge of its epidemiology and clinical
significance in CF.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcf.2019.11.004 
PMID: 31759908 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
have no conflict of interest to declare.

