
1. EMBO Mol Med. 2020 Sep 28:e12695. doi: 10.15252/emmm.202012695. [Epub ahead of
print]

Mannose receptor-derived peptides neutralize pore-forming toxins and reduce
inflammation and development of pneumococcal disease.

Subramanian K(1), Iovino F(1), Tsikourkitoudi V(1), Merkl P(1), Ahmed S(2), Berry
SB(3), Aschtgen MS(1), Svensson M(3), Bergman P(2)(4), Sotiriou GA(1),
Henriques-Normark B(1)(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medicine, Center for Infectious Medicine, Karolinska Institutet,
Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, Sweden.
(4)The Immunodeficiency Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Clinical Microbiology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine (LKC) and Singapore Centre on Environmental 
Life Sciences Engineering (SCELSE), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 
Singapore.

Cholesterol-dependent cytolysins (CDCs) are essential virulence factors for many 
human pathogens like Streptococcus pneumoniae (pneumolysin, PLY), Streptococcus
pyogenes (streptolysin O, SLO), and Listeria monocytogenes (Listeriolysin, LLO)
and induce cytolysis and inflammation. Recently, we identified that pneumococcal 
PLY interacts with the mannose receptor (MRC-1) on specific immune cells thereby 
evoking an anti-inflammatory response at sublytic doses. Here, we identified the 
interaction sites between MRC-1 and CDCs using computational docking. We designed
peptides from the CTLD4 domain of MRC-1 that binds to PLY, SLO, and LLO,
respectively. In vitro, the peptides blocked CDC-induced cytolysis and
inflammatory cytokine production by human macrophages. Also, they reduced
PLY-induced damage of the epithelial barrier integrity as well as blocked
bacterial invasion into the epithelium in a 3D lung tissue model. Pre-treatment
of human DCs with peptides blocked bacterial uptake via MRC-1 and reduced
intracellular bacterial survival by targeting bacteria to autophagosomes. In
order to use the peptides for treatment in vivo, we developed calcium phosphate
nanoparticles (CaP NPs) as peptide nanocarriers for intranasal delivery of
peptides and enhanced bioactivity. Co-administration of peptide-loaded CaP NPs
during infection improved survival and bacterial clearance in both zebrafish and 
mice models of pneumococcal infection. We suggest that MRC-1 peptides can be
employed as adjunctive therapeutics with antibiotics to treat bacterial
infections by countering the action of CDCs.

© 2020 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

DOI: 10.15252/emmm.202012695 
PMID: 32985105 

