
1. Vet Microbiol. 2020 Jun;245:108710. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108710. Epub 2020 
May 5.

Streptococcus uberis strains originating from bovine uteri provoke upregulation
of pro-inflammatory factors mRNA expression of endometrial epithelial cells in
vitro.

Ballas P(1), Gabler C(2), Wagener K(3), Drillich M(3), Ehling-Schulz M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Microbiology, Institute for Microbiology, Department of
Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Clinical
Unit for Herd Health Management in Ruminants, Department for Farm Animals and
Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Freie
Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Clinical Unit for Herd Health Management in Ruminants, Department for Farm
Animals and Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, 
Austria.
(4)Functional Microbiology, Institute for Microbiology, Department of
Pathobiology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: Monika.Ehling-Schulz@vetmeduni.ac.at.

Streptococcus uberis is an opportunistic pathogen involved in various infections 
of cattle. It is a well-known etiological agent of bovine mastitis and has
recently also been linked to postpartum endometritis in dairy cows. S. uberis is 
frequently isolated from the uterus of postpartum cows but its actual
contribution to host pathophysiology is unknown and information on S. uberis
virulence factors potentially involved in the disease is lacking. To gain first
insights into the role of S. uberis in the pathology of bovine endometritis, a
cell-culture-based infection model was employed to study inflammatory host
responses and investigate cytotoxic effects. A comprehensive strain panel,
comprising 53 strains previously isolated from bovine uteri, was compiled and
screened for known virulence factor genes. Isolates showing distinct virulence
gene patterns were used to study their impact on cellular viability and influence
on mRNA expression of pro-inflammatory factors in endometrial epithelial cells.
Our study revealed that S. uberis negatively impacts the viability of endometrial
epithelial cells and provokes an upregulation of specific pro-inflammatory
factors, although with certain strains having a greater effect than others.
Especially, mRNA expression of IL1A and CXCL8 as well as CXCL1/2 and PTGS2 was
found to be stimulated by S. uberis. These results suggest that S. uberis might
indeed contribute to the establishment of bovine endometritis.

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2020.108710 
PMID: 32456828 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that the research was performed without any commercial or financial
affiliation that could be deemed as a potential conflict of interest.

