
1. J Infect Dis. 2020 Aug 6. pii: jiaa482. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa482. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Adoptive Transfer of Serum Samples From Children With Invasive Staphylococcal
Infection and Protection Against Staphylococcus aureus Sepsis.

Tsai CM(1), Soper N(2), Bennett M(2), Fallon JK(3), Michell AR(3), Alter G(3),
Liu GY(1), Thomsen I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, University of
California, San Diego, California, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

A successful Staphylococcus aureus vaccine remains elusive, and one controversy
in the field is whether humans generate a protective adaptive immune response to 
infection. We developed a bacterial challenge murine assay that directly assesses
the protective capacity of adoptively transferred human serum samples. We first
validated the model by showing that postpneumococcal vaccine serum samples from
humans induced effective clearance of Streptococcus pneumoniae in mice. We then
found that human serum samples adoptively transferred from children with invasive
S. aureus infections exhibited protection from disease in a murine model, with
some samples conferring near complete protection. These findings demonstrate that
human serum samples are capable of conferring a protective adaptive response
generated by humans during invasive staphylococcal disease, allowing for the
study of protective factors in a murine model. Identification of the protective
factors present in the most efficacious serum samples would be of high interest
as potential staphylococcal vaccine candidates or passive therapeutics.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiaa482 
PMID: 32990305 

