
1. Clin Nutr. 2020 Jul 23. pii: S0261-5614(20)30389-7. doi:
10.1016/j.clnu.2020.07.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Fermented infant formula (with Bifidobacterium breve C50 and Streptococcus
thermophilus O65) with prebiotic oligosaccharides is safe and modulates the gut
microbiota towards a microbiota closer to that of breastfed infants.

Béghin L(1), Tims S(2), Roelofs M(3), Rougé C(4), Oozeer R(3), Rakza T(5),
Chirico G(6), Roeselers G(3), Knol J(7), Rozé JC(8), Turck D(9).

Author information: 
(1)Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Clinical Investigation Center, CIC-1403-Inserm-CHU and
U1286 - INFINITE - Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, F-59000,
Lille, France.
(2)Danone Nutricia Research, Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
sebastian.tims@danone.com.
(3)Danone Nutricia Research, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(4)Laboratoire Gallia, Limonest, France.
(5)Department of Neonatology, Lille University Jeanne de Flandre Children's
Hospital and Faculty of Medicine, University of Lille, F-59000, Lille, France.
(6)Department of Neonatology, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(7)Danone Nutricia Research, Utrecht, the Netherlands; Laboratory of
Microbiology, Wageningen University, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Neonatal Medicine, Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, France.
(9)Univ. Lille, CHU Lille, Clinical Investigation Center, CIC-1403-Inserm-CHU and
U1286 - INFINITE - Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, F-59000,
Lille, France; Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department
of Pediatrics, Lille University Jeanne de Flandre Children's Hospital and Faculty
of Medicine, University of Lille, F-59000, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Microbiome-modulators can help positively steer early-life
microbiota development but their effects on microbiome functionality and
associated safety and tolerance need to be demonstrated. We investigated the
microbiome impact of a new combination of bioactive compounds, produced by the
food-grade microorganisms Bifidobacterium breve C50 and Streptococcus
thermophilus ST065 during a fermentation process, and prebiotics in an infant
formula. Tolerance and safety were also assessed.
METHODS: An exploratory prospective, randomized, double-blind, controlled,
multi-centre study was designed to investigate the effect of bioactive compounds 
and prebiotics (short-chain galacto-oligosaccharides (scGOS)/long-chain
fructo-oligosaccharides (lcFOS) 9:1). Experimental formulas containing these
bioactive compounds and prebiotics (FERM/scGOS/lcFOS), prebiotics (scGOS/lcFOS), 
or bioactive compounds (FERM), were compared to a standard cow's milk-based
control formula (Control). Exclusively breastfed infants were included as a
reference arm since exclusive breastfeeding is considered as the optimal feeding 
for infants. The study lasted six months and included visits to health care
professionals at baseline, two, four and six months of age. Stool SIgA
concentration was the primary study outcome parameter.
RESULTS: There were 280 infants randomized over the experimental arms and 70
infants entered the breastfed-reference arm. Demographics were balanced, growth
and tolerance parameters were according to expectation and adverse events were
limited. At four months of age the median SIgA concentration in the
FERM/scGOS/lcFOS group was significantly higher compared to the Control group
(p = 0.03) and was more similar to the concentrations found in the
breastfed-reference group. Bifidobacterium increased over time in all groups. The
FERM/scGOS/lcFOS combination resulted in a microbiota composition and metabolic
activity closer to the breastfed infants' microbiome.
CONCLUSION: The FERM/scGOS/lcFOS combination showed a significant positive effect
on SIgA levels. All formulas tested were associated with normal growth and were
well-tolerated. Additionally, at four months of age the FERM/scGOS/lcFOS formula 
brought the microbiome composition and metabolic activity closer towards that of 
breastfed infants.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRY: Registration number NTR2726 (Netherlands Trial Register;
www.trialregister.nl/).

Copyright © 2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clnu.2020.07.024 
PMID: 32893049 

