
1. Prev Vet Med. 2020 Sep;182:105090. doi: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2020.105090. Epub
2020 Jul 12.

A simulation study to investigate the added value in using differential somatic
cell count as an additional indicator for udder health management in dairy herds.

Gussmann M(1), Kirkeby C(2), Schwarz D(3), Farre M(4), Halasa T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Animal Welfare and Disease Control, Department of Veterinary and
Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen University,
Frederiksberg, Denmark. Electronic address: makg@sund.ku.dk.
(2)Section of Animal Welfare and Disease Control, Department of Veterinary and
Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Copenhagen University,
Frederiksberg, Denmark.
(3)FOSS Analytical A/S, Hillerød, Denmark.
(4)SEGES Livestock Innovation, Aarhus, Denmark.

Mastitis is one of the most costly diseases in dairy herds worldwide. Somatic
cell count (SCC) is widely used as an indicator for subclinical intramammary
infections (IMI) that may eventually cause mastitis in dairy herds. Differential 
somatic cell count (DSCC) has recently been introduced as an additional indicator
for IMI. The objective of this study was to investigate the value of using DSCC
as an additional indicator to select cows for testing and subsequent intervention
for subclinical mastitis during the lactation. We parameterized an existing
bio-economic simulation model for dairy herds to include DSCC. Then, we simulated
three Danish dairy cattle herd situations with different pathogen distributions
where the main pathogens were 1) Staphylococcus aureus, 2) Streptococcus
agalactiae, and 3) Streptococcus uberis. In these herds, we simulated two
different selection strategies for testing (bacterial culture) for subclinical
IMI and various intervention strategies for test positive cases. The first
selection strategy considered only SCC; cows were selected for testing if they
had a low SCC measurement followed by two high SCC measurements. In the second
selection strategy, cows additionally had to have a high DSCC measurement.
Results showed that both selection strategies led to a similar net income and to 
a similar number of clinical and subclinical cases for all investigated
intervention strategies. However, when using DSCC in the selection of animals,
the number of treatment days and the number of cows culled in relation to IMI was
reduced: The median annual number of treatment days was reduced by 25-38 days in 
herd 1, by 25-42 days in herd 2, and by 30-48 days in herd 3, depending on the
intervention strategy. The median annual number of cows culled in relation to IMI
was reduced by up to 8 cows (10 cows in herd 3) for one of the intervention
strategies. Subject to limitations associated with model assumptions, these
results suggest that considering DSCC when selecting cows for testing can reduce 
IMI related culling and the use of antibiotics without changing in-herd
prevalence nor resulting in economic loss.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2020.105090 
PMID: 32717473 

