
1. World J Oncol. 2020 Jun;11(3):116-121. doi: 10.14740/wjon1270. Epub 2020 May 14.

Small Bowel Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor as a Gateway for Streptococcus
anginosus Causing Multiple Liver Abscesses.

Conte GA(1), Harmon JS(2), Masia RA(3), Marchesani D(1), Sun X(4), Pichardo
EM(3), Parrilla FB(5), Levitt MJ(1), Chinnici AA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Hackensack
Meridian Health, Neptune, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Jefferson Health New Jersey, Jefferson University
Hospital, Stratford, NJ, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Hackensack
Meridian Health, Neptune, NJ, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Hackensack
Meridian Health, Neptune, NJ, USA.
(5)University de Santiago de Compostela, Galicia, Spain.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are the most common type of mesenchymal
neoplasm of the gastrointestinal tract but consist of only 1% of all primary
gastrointestinal neoplasms. Differentiated from other spindle cell tumors, GISTs 
are uniquely positive for CD117 expression which allows for molecular targeting
therapy with imatinib mesylate (Gleevec). Clinical presentations are variable,
ranging from asymptomatic to vague symptoms of abdominal pain, early satiety,
abdominal distention or gastrointestinal bleeding. Very rarely, patients can
present with tumor-bowel fistula and intra-abdominal abscesses. In this article, 
we discuss a rare presentation of a middle-aged male with multiple liver
abscesses found to have a primary small bowel GIST. This patient received prompt 
intravenous antibiotics; however, hepatic abscesses can be easily misinterpreted 
as cystic hepatic metastases which can delay appropriate therapy. Streptococcus
anginosus was found to be responsible for the formation of the liver abscesses
visualized on computed tomography (CT) scan. Similar to Streptococcus bovis,
knowledge in the literature is arising about the association between S. anginosus
and gastrointestinal malignancies. This case highlights the importance of
identifying concomitant primary GISTs with intra-hepatic abscesses, as these
lesions can be easily misconstrued as liver metastases and consequently
mismanaged. We herein emphasize that hepatic abscesses are a potential sequela of
GISTs and should thus prompt further investigation for potential malignancies, if
warranted, so that there is no delay in treatment of these gastrointestinal
tumors.

Copyright 2020, Conte et al.

DOI: 10.14740/wjon1270 
PMCID: PMC7239573
PMID: 32494319 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.

