
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Sep 21. pii: JB.00504-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00504-20. [Epub ahead
of print]

Genetic basis underlying the hyper-hemolytic phenotype of Streptococcus
agalactiae strain CNCTC10/84.

Zhu L(1)(2), Beres SB(3), Yerramilli P(3), Pruitt L(3), Cantu CC(3), Olsen
RJ(3)(2), Musser JM(3)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research,
Houston Methodist Research Institute, and Department of Pathology and Genomic
Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
lzhu2@houstonmethodist.org.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Medical College of
Cornell University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Center for Molecular and Translational Human Infectious Diseases Research,
Houston Methodist Research Institute, and Department of Pathology and Genomic
Medicine, Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.

Streptococcus agalactiae (group B streptococcus, GBS) is a major cause of
infections in newborns, pregnant women, and immunocompromised patients. GBS
strain CNCTC10/84 is a clinical isolate that has high virulence in animal models 
of infection and has been used extensively to study GBS pathogenesis. Two unusual
features of this strain are hyper-hemolytic activity and hypo-CAMP factor
activity. These two phenotypes are typical of GBS strains functionally deficient 
in the CovR-CovS two-component regulatory system. A previous whole-genome
sequencing study found that strain CNCTC10/84 has intact covR and covS regulatory
genes. We investigated CovR-CovS regulation in CNCTC10/84 and discovered that a
single-nucleotide insertion in a homopolymeric tract in the covR promoter region 
underlies the strong hemolytic activity and weak CAMP activity of this strain.
Using isogenic mutant strains, we demonstrate that this single-nucleotide
insertion confers significantly decreased expression of covR and covS, and
altered expression of CovR-CovS regulated genes, including genes encoding
β-hemolysin and CAMP factor. This single-nucleotide insertion also confers
significantly increased GBS survival in human whole blood ex vivo IMPORTANCE
Group B streptococcus (GBS) is the leading cause of neonatal sepsis, pneumonia,
and meningitis. GBS strain CNCTC10/84 is a highly virulent blood isolate that has
been used extensively to study GBS pathogenesis for over twenty years. Strain
CNCTC10/84 has an unusually strong hemolytic activity, but the genetic basis is
unknown. In this study, we discovered that a single-nucleotide insertion in an
intergenic homopolymeric tract is responsible for the elevated hemolytic activity
of CNCTC10/84.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00504-20 
PMID: 32958630 

