
1. J Infect Chemother. 2020 Aug;26(8):795-801. doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2020.03.008. Epub
2020 Apr 10.

Effect of probiotics on gut microbiome in patients with administration of
surgical antibiotic prophylaxis: A randomized controlled study.

Kaku N(1), Matsumoto N(2), Sasaki D(2), Tsuda K(3), Kosai K(4), Uno N(4),
Morinaga Y(4), Tagami A(3), Adachi S(3), Hasegawa H(4), Osaki M(3), Yanagihara
K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. Electronic address: kaku-ngs@umin.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis (SAP) is recommended for the prevention of
surgical site infections. However, there is a concern about adverse effects of
SAP, such as antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD). To prevent AAD, administration
of probiotics has been investigated. Although recent advances in next-generation 
sequencing makes it possible to analyze the gut microbiome, the effect of
probiotics on the gut microbiome in the patients with SAP remains unknown. To
test a hypothesis that SAP influences the gut microbiome and probiotics prevent
the influence, a randomized controlled study was conducted with patients who
underwent spinal surgery at Nagasaki University Hospital. After obtaining
informed consent, the patients were automatically classified into the
non-probiotics group and the probiotics group. In the probiotics group, the
patients took 1 g of Enterococcus faecium 129 BIO 3B-R, 3 times a day on
postoperative days (PODs) 1-5. The feces of all patients were sampled before
administration of SAP and on PODs 5 and 10. We compared alpha and beta diversity 
and differential abundance analysis of the gut microbiome before and after SAP.
During the study period, a total of 33 patients were evaluated, comprising 17
patients in the non-probiotics group and 16 in the probiotics group. There was no
significant difference between the groups regarding patient characteristics. In
alpha and beta diversity, there were no significant differences among all
combinations. In differential abundance analysis at operational taxonomic unit
level, Streptococcus gallolyticus and Roseburia were significantly increased in
the non-probiotics group and significantly decreased in the probiotics group.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2020.03.008 
PMID: 32284181 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Kaku N and
Yanagihara K received lecture fee from Biofermin Pharmaceutical Ltd (Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan). Matsumoto N, Sasaki D, Tsuda K, Kosai K, Uno N, Morinaga Y, Tagami A,
Adachi S, and Hasegawa H declare no potential conflict of interest.

