
1. J Pharm Biomed Anal. 2020 Sep 22;192:113647. doi: 10.1016/j.jpba.2020.113647.
[Epub ahead of print]

The distribution of cultivable oral anaerobic microbiota identified by MALDI-TOF 
MS in healthy subjects and in patients with periodontal disease.

Wei YS(1), Chang YR(2), Tsai YT(1), Yang YT(1), Weng SH(3), Tseng LF(4), Chou
HC(5), Hu AT(1), Liao EC(1), Chen HY(1), Lin GY(6), Cheng WC(7), Chan HL(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan; General Biologicals
Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(4)Life Science in Department of Applied Science, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sciences, National
Tsing Hua University, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University,
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(7)SDGs Teaching and Research Headquarters, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: wccheng@gms.tcu.edu.tw.
(8)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hlchan@life.nthu.edu.tw.

In this study, we aimed to identify the cultivatable oral anaerobic bacterial
distribution in oral cavity by MALDI-TOF Biotyper. The bacterial distribution of 
three groups, including subjects with/without periodontal disease, two clusters
of age (60 years as the cutoff), and before/after treatment, were investigated in
this study. There were 38 participants recruited in this study, involving 18
subjects with moderate to severe periodontal-infected patients and 20 healthy
controls. Total number of 126 bacterial species were identified by MALDI-TOF MS. 
The relative abundance of Streptococcus gordonii and Streptococcus intermedius in
periodontal patients is higher than healthy controls indicating potential
biomarkers for periodontal disease. Participants with periodontal disease were
subdivided in to two clusters of age (60 years as the cutoff), 11 and 7
participants were age <60 years and>60 years, respectively. Meanwhile, the
incidence of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus oralis infection were
higher in the subjects above 60 years old than below. Moreover, the bacterial
distribution between pre-treatment and post-treatment was similar indicating that
basic treatment without the ability to redistribute the microbiota. In summary,
the cultivable oral anaerobic bacteria were identified by MALDI-TOF MS and the
bacterial distribution shifting was shown to be associated with the progress of
periodontal disease to aging and basic treatment. This study provided information
for diagnosis and treatment guidelines for oral healthcare.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpba.2020.113647 
PMID: 33010501 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no declarations of interest.

