
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2020 Sep 16. doi: 10.1111/omi.12311. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of the RprY Response Regulator in P. gingivalis Community Development and
Virulence.

Shen D(1)(2), Perpich JD(1), Stocke KS(1), Yakoumatos L(1), Fitzsimonds ZR(1),
Liu C(1), Miller DP(1)(3), Lamont RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Louisville School of Dentistry, Louisville, KY, 40202, USA.
(2)Current address: State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases & National Clinical
Research Center for Oral Diseases &, Department of Periodontics, West China
Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA, 23298, USA.

Porphyromonas gingivalis expresses a limited number of two-component systems,
including RprY, an orphan response regulator which lacks a cognate sensor kinase.
In this study we examined cross phosphorylation of RprY on tyrosine residues and 
its importance for RprY function. We show that RprY reacts with phosphotyrosine
antibodies, and a tyrosine (Y) residue at position 41 is predicted to be solvent 
accessible. Loss of RprY increased the level of heterotypic community development
with Streptococcus gordonii, and the community-suppressive function of RprY
required Y41. Expression of the Mfa1 fimbrial adhesin was increased in the rprY
mutant and in the mutant complemented with rprY containing a Y41F mutation. In a 
microscale thermophoresis assay, recombinant RprY protein bound to the promoter
region of mfa1, and binding was diminished in RprY with a Y41F substitution. RprY
was required for virulence of P. gingivalis in a murine model of alveolar bone
loss. Transcriptional profiling indicated that RprY can control the expression of
genes encoding the type IX secretion system (T9SS) machinery and virulence
factors secreted through the T9SS, including the gingipain proteases and
peptidylarginine deiminase (PPAD). Collectively, these results establish the RprY
response regulator as a component of the tyrosine phosphorylation regulon in P.
gingivalis, which can independently control heterotypic community development
through the Mfa1 fimbriae, and virulence through the T9SS.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12311 
PMID: 32940001 

