
1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020 Aug 3. doi: 10.1111/jgh.15206. [Epub ahead of
print]

The relationship between oral-origin bacteria in the fecal microbiome and
albumin-bilirubin grade in patients with hepatitis C.

Yamamoto K(1), Honda T(1), Ito T(1), Ishizu Y(1), Kuzuya T(1), Nakamura M(1),
Miyahara R(1), Kawashima H(1), Ishigami M(1), Fujishiro M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Bacteria of oral origin (BO) in the gut are associated with prognosis
in patients with cirrhosis. The Greengenes database (gg_13_8) is widely used in
microbiome analysis, but the expanded Human Oral Microbiome Database (eHOMD), a
specialized database for BO, can add more detailed information. We used each
database to evaluate the relationship between the albumin-bilirubin grade (ALBI) 
and the microbiome in patients with hepatitis C.
METHODS: Eighty patients were classified into the low ALBI group (LA; n = 34) or 
high ALBI group (HA; n = 46). Isolated DNA from stool was amplified to target the
V3-4 regions of 16S rRNA. The microbiomes of the two groups were compared using
gg_13_8 or eHOMD. We evaluated the associations between microbiomes and prognoses
using Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: At the genus level, the two groups differed significantly regarding 6
(gg_13_8) and 7 (eHOMD) types of bacteria. All types except Akkermansia are
classified as BO. Both databases showed an increase in Streptococcus and
Veillonella. eHOMD showed a decrease in Fusobacterium and an increase in
Fretibacterium; both produce various types of short-chain fatty acids. At the
species level, the two groups demonstrated significant differences in 2 (gg_13_8)
and 6 (eHOMD) bacterial types. Selenomonas noxia and Streptococcus salivarius
were related to poor prognosis in univariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: The HA group demonstrated increased BO, most of which produce lactic 
acid or acetic acid. The correlation between the microbiome and metabolism might 
be related to prognosis. eHOMD was a useful database for analyzing BO.

© 2020 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley &
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.15206 
PMID: 32744764 

