
1. Protein Sci. 2020 Sep 4. doi: 10.1002/pro.3941. [Epub ahead of print]

Symmetry breaking and structural polymorphism in a bacterial microcompartment
shell protein for choline utilization.

Ochoa JM(1), Nguyen VN(2), Nie M(2), Sawaya MR(3), Bobik TA(4), Yeates
TO(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)UCLA-Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA), California, Los Angeles, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA), California, Los Angeles, USA.
(3)UCLA-DOE Institute of Genomics and Proteomics, University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA), California, Los Angeles, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular Biology; Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa, USA.

Bacterial microcompartments are protein-based organelles that carry out
specialized metabolic functions in diverse bacteria. Their outer shells are built
from several thousand protein subunits. Some of the architectural principles of
bacterial microcompartments have been articulated, with lateral packing of flat
hexameric BMC proteins providing the basic foundation for assembly. Nonetheless, 
a complete understanding has been elusive, partly owing to polymorphic mechanisms
of assembly exhibited by most microcompartment types. An earlier study of one
homologous BMC shell protein subfamily, EutS/PduU, revealed a profoundly bent,
rather than flat, hexameric structure. The possibility of a specialized
architectural role was hypothesized, but artifactual effects of crystallization
could not be ruled out. Here we report a series of crystal structures of an
orthologous protein, CutR, from a glycyl-radical type choline-utilizing
microcompartment from the bacterium Streptococcus intermedius. Depending on
crystal form, expression construct, and minor mutations, a range of novel
quaternary architectures was observed, including two spiral hexagonal assemblies.
A new graphical approach helps illuminate the variations in BMC hexameric
structure, with results substantiating the idea that the EutS/PduU/CutR subfamily
of BMC proteins may endow microcompartment shells with flexible modes of
assembly.

© 2020 The Protein Society.

DOI: 10.1002/pro.3941 
PMID: 32885887 

