
1. Gastroenterology. 2020 Sep 10. pii: S0016-5085(20)35129-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2020.09.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Streptococcus thermophilus inhibits colorectal tumorigenesis through secreting
β-galactosidase.

Li Q(1), Hu W(2), Liu WX(3), Zhao LY(3), Huang D(2), Liu XD(2), Chan H(2), Zhang 
Y(2), Zeng JD(2), Coker OO(3), Kang W(4), Man Ng SS(5), Zhang L(1), Wong SH(3),
Gin T(2), Vai Chan MT(6), Wu JL(7), Yu J(8), Kei Wu WK(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care and Peter Hung Pain Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(2)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care and Peter Hung Pain Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, Li Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China.
(4)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(6)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care and Peter Hung Pain Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic
address: mtvchan@cuhk.edu.hk.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicines, Macau
University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao. Electronic address:
jlwu@must.edu.moand.
(8)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China; State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, Li Ka Shing
Institute of Health Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China. Electronic address: junyu@cuhk.edu.hk.
(9)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care and Peter Hung Pain Research
Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; State Key
Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
wukakei@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Streptococcus thermophilus was identified to be depleted in
patients with colorectal cancer (CRC) by shotgun metagenomic sequencing of 526
multi-cohort fecal samples. Here, we aim to investigate if this bacterium could
act as a prophylactics for CRC prevention.
METHODS: The anti-tumor effects of S. thermophilus were assessed in cultured
colonic epithelial cells and in two murine models of intestinal tumorigenesis.
The tumor-suppressive protein produced by S. thermophilus was identified by mass 
spectrometry and followed by β-galactosidase activity assay. The mutant strain of
S. thermophilus was constructed by homologous recombination. The effect of S.
thermophilus on the gut microbiota composition was assessed by shot-gun
metagenomic sequencing.
RESULTS: Oral gavage of S. thermophilus significantly reduced tumor formation in 
both Apcmin/+ and azoxymethane-injected mice. Co-incubation with S. thermophilus 
or its conditioned medium decreased the proliferation of cultured CRC cells.
β-galactosidase was identified as the critical protein produced by S.
thermophilus by mass-spectrometry screening and β-galactosidase activity assay.
β-galactosidase secreted by S. thermophilus inhibited cell proliferation, lowered
colony formation, induced cell cycle arrest, and promoted apoptosis of cultured
CRC cells and retarded the growth of CRC xenograft. The mutant S. thermophilus
without functional β-galactosidase lost its tumor-suppressive effect. Also, S.
thermophilus increased the gut abundance of known probiotics, including
Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus via β-galactosidase. β-galactosidase-dependent 
production of galactose interfered with energy homeostasis to activate oxidative 
phosphorylation and downregulate the Hippo pathways kinases, which partially
mediated the anticancer effects of S. thermophilus.
CONCLUSION: S. thermophilus is a novel prophylactics for CRC prevention in mice. 
The tumor-suppressive effect of S. thermophilus is mediated at least by the
secretion of β-galactosidase.

Copyright © 2020 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2020.09.003 
PMID: 32920015 

