
1. Contact Dermatitis. 2020 Jul 16. doi: 10.1111/cod.13668. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential influence of Streptococcus mitis on host response to metals in
reconstructed human skin and oral mucosa.

Shang L(1), Deng D(1), Roffel S(2), Gibbs S(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Oral Cell Biology, Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam
(ACTA), University of Amsterdam and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Skin and oral mucosa are continuously exposed to potential metal
sensitizers while hosting abundant microbes, which may influence the host
response to sensitizers. This host response may also be influenced by the route
of exposure that is skin or oral mucosa, due to their different immune
properties.
OBJECTIVE: Determine how commensal Streptococcus mitis influences the host
response to nickel sulfate (sensitizer) and titanium(IV) bis(ammonium
lactato)dihydroxide (questionable sensitizer) in reconstructed human skin (RHS)
and gingiva (RHG).
METHODS: RHS/RHG was exposed to nickel or titanium, in the presence or absence of
S. mitis for 24 hours. Histology, cytokine secretion, and Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) expression were assessed.
RESULTS: S. mitis increased interleukin (IL)-6, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL5, and CCL20
secretion in RHS but not in RHG; co-application with nickel further increased
cytokine secretion. In contrast, titanium suppressed S. mitis-induced cytokine
secretion in RHS and had no influence on RHG. S. mitis and metals differentially 
regulated TLR1 and TLR4 in RHS, and predominantly TLR4 in RHG.
CONCLUSION: Co-exposure of S. mitis and nickel resulted in a more potent innate
immune response in RHS than in RHG, whereas titanium remained inert. These
results indicate the important influence of commensal microbes and the route of
exposure on the host's response to metals. HIGHLIGHTS : Streptococcus mitis
induces a more pronounced cytokine secretion profile from reconstructed human
skin (RHS) compared to reconstructed human gingiva (RHG). Co-exposure of S. mitis
and nickel resulted in a more potent innate immune response in RHS than in RHG,
whereas titanium remained inert.

© 2020 The Authors. Contact Dermatitis published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cod.13668 
PMID: 32677222 

