
1. J Dairy Sci. 2020 Jul;103(7):6569-6575. doi: 10.3168/jds.2019-17575. Epub 2020
Apr 22.

Short communication: Barrier characteristics of 3 external teat sealants to
prevent bacterial penetration under in vitro conditions using rubber calf-feeding
nipples.

Piepers S(1), Van Den Brulle I(2), Mertens K(2), De Vliegher S(2).

Author information: 
(1)M-team and Mastitis and Milk Quality Research Unit, Department of
Reproduction, Obstetrics and Herd Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent
University, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium. Electronic address: Sofie.Piepers@UGent.be.
(2)M-team and Mastitis and Milk Quality Research Unit, Department of
Reproduction, Obstetrics and Herd Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent
University, 9820 Merelbeke, Belgium.

The main objective of this study was to evaluate the barrier characteristics of 3
external teat sealants for dry cows in preventing bacterial penetration by 3
common major mastitis pathogens (Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Streptococcus uberis) via a novel in vitro simulation model using rubber
calf-feeding nipples. All feeding nipples were filled with a sterile cotton plug 
soaked in sterile broth heart infusion medium and were treated as follows: rubber
teats 1 and 5 were sealed with Ubera Dry (Inovet, Arendonk, Belgium); rubber
teats 2 and 6 were sealed with T-Hexx Dry (Huvepharma Livestock, St. Louis, MO); 
rubber teats 3 and 7 were sealed with Uddergold Dry (Ecolab Food and Beverage
Division, St. Paul, MN); and rubber teats 4 and 8 remained unsealed and served as
positive and negative controls, respectively. After the dips had dried, rubber
teats 1 to 4 were immersed in a suspension of E. coli (experiment 1), Staph.
aureus (experiment 2), or Strep. uberis (experiment 3; ≥1.5 × 108 cfu/mL) for 24 
h, whereas rubber teats 5 to 8 were not exposed to the bacterial suspensions. All
external teat sealants adhered well to the rubber teats. All cotton plugs
collected from the teats that were not exposed to E. coli, Staph. aureus, or
Strep. uberis (rubber teats 5 to 8) remained culture-negative, except for 1 (due 
to contamination). Of the rubber teats that were exposed to the major mastitis
pathogens, all cotton plugs collected from the teats dipped with Ubera Dry and
T-Hexx Dry remained culture-negative for the mastitis pathogen they were exposed 
to. The cotton plugs of the rubber teats that were sealed with Uddergold Dry and 
exposed to E. coli and Strep. uberis showed positive cultures for the respective 
bacteria, as demonstrated using strain-typing. The cotton plugs collected from
the rubber teats that were not sealed with an external teat sealant and that
served as positive controls became culture-positive for the mastitis pathogens
they were exposed to. We conclude that Ubera Dry showed comparable and superior
barrier performance against penetration of E. coli, Staph. aureus, and Strep.
uberis compared with T-Hexx Dry and Uddergold Dry, respectively, under in vitro
conditions using a novel in vitro simulation model. Although one should be aware 
that the method has not yet been validated to predict risk of intramammary
infections, the proposed technique can be a meaningful starting point to evaluate
and compare the barrier characteristics of external teat sealants in preventing
bacterial penetration. A large-scale clinical trial is needed before any definite
conclusions can be drawn as to the adherence, duration of adherence, barrier
performance, and efficacy in protection against intramammary infections of the 3 
external teat sealants under field conditions.

Copyright © 2020 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2019-17575 
PMID: 32331896 

