
1. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2020 Jul 27;14:2977-2985. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S255269.
eCollection 2020.

Potential Allylpyrocatechol Derivatives as Antibacterial Agent Against Oral
Pathogen of S. sanguinis ATCC 10,556 and as Inhibitor of MurA Enzymes: in vitro
and in silico Study.

Kurnia D(1), Hutabarat GS(1), Windaryanti D(1), Herlina T(1), Herdiyati Y(2),
Satari MH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Science,
Universitas Padjadjaran, Sumedang, Indonesia.
(2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas
Padjadjaran, Bandung, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas Padjadjaran,
Bandung, Indonesia.

Background: Streptococcus sanguinis is Gram-positive bacteria that contribute to 
caries. Many antibacterial agents are resistant against bacteria so that the
discovery of new antibacterial agents is a crucial issue. Mechanism of
antibacterial agents by disrupting cell wall bacteria is a promising target to be
developed. One of the enzymes contributing to the cell wall is MurA enzyme. MurA 
is an enzyme catalyzing the first step of peptidoglycan biosynthesis in the cell 
wall formation. Inhibiting MurA is an effective and efficient way to kill the
bacteria. Source of bioactive compounds including the antibacterial agent can be 
found in natural product such as herbal plant. Piper betle L. was reported to
contain active antibacterial compounds. However, there is no more information on 
the antibacterial activity and molecular mechanism of P. betle's compound against
S. sanguinis.
Purpose: The study aims to identify antibacterial constituents of P. betle L. and
evaluate their activities through two different methods including in vitro and in
silico analysis.
Materials and Methods: The antibacterial agent was purified by bioactivity-guided
isolation with combination chromatography methods and the chemical structure was 
determined by spectroscopic methods. The in vitro antibacterial activity was
evaluated by disc diffusion and dilution methods while the in silico study of a
compound binds on the MurA was determined using PyRx program.
Results: The antibacterial compound identified as allylpyrocatechol showed
inhibitory activity against S. sanguinis with an inhibition zone of 11.85 mm at
1%, together with MIC and MBC values of 39.1 and 78.1 μg/mL, respectively.
Prediction for molecular inhibition mechanism of allylpyrocatechols against the
MurA presented two allylpyrocatechol derivatives showing binding activity of
-5.4, stronger than fosfomycin as a reference with the binding activity of -4.6.
Conclusion: Two allylpyrocatechol derivatives were predicted to have a good
potency as a novel natural antibacterial agent against S. sanguinis through
blocking MurA activity that causes disruption of bacterial cell wall.

© 2020 Kurnia et al.

DOI: 10.2147/DDDT.S255269 
PMCID: PMC7396738
PMID: 32801638 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

