
1. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2020 Jun 18;75(7):1258-1266. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glaa122.

Early Signs of Gut Microbiome Aging: Biomarkers of Inflammation, Metabolism, and 
Macromolecular Damage in Young Adulthood.

Renson A(1), Mullan Harris K(2), Dowd JB(3), Gaydosh L(4), McQueen MB(5), Krauter
KS(6), Shannahan M(7), Aiello AE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, The Gillings School of Global Public Health,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(2)Department of Sociology and Carolina Population Center, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill.
(3)Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, University of Oxford, UK.
(4)Center for Medicine, Health, and Society, Vanderbilt University, Nashville,
Tennessee.
(5)Department of Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado Boulder.
(6)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado Boulder.
(7)Institute of Sociology, University of Zurich, Switzerland.

Emerging links between gut microbiota and diseases of aging point to possible
shared immune, metabolic, and cellular damage mechanisms, operating long before
diseases manifest. We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of fecal samples collected
from a subsample (n = 668) of Add Health Wave V, a nationally representative
longitudinal study of adults aged 32-42. An overlapping subsample (n = 345)
included whole-blood RNA-seq. We examined associations between fecal taxonomic
abundances and dried blood spot-based markers of lipid and glucose homeostasis
and C-reactive protein (measured in Wave IV), as well as gene expression markers 
of inflammation, cellular damage, immune cell composition, and transcriptomic age
(measured in Wave V), using Bayesian hierarchical models adjusted for potential
confounders. We additionally estimated a co-abundance network between
inflammation-related genes and bacterial taxa using penalized Gaussian graphical 
models. Strong and consistent microbiota associations emerged for HbA1c, glucose,
C-reactive protein, and principal components of genes upregulated in
inflammation, DNA repair, and reactive oxygen species, with Streptococcus
infantis, Pseudomonas spp., and Peptoniphilus as major players for each. This
pattern was largely echoed (though attenuated) for immunological cell composition
gene sets, and only Serratia varied meaningfully by transcriptomic age. Network
co-abundance indicated relationships between Prevotella sp., Bacteroides sp., and
Ruminococcus sp. and gut immune/metabolic regulatory activity, and Ruminococcus
sp, Dialister, and Butyrivibrio crossotus with balance between Th1 and Th2
inflammation. In conclusion, many common associations between microbiota and
major physiologic aging mechanisms are evident in early-mid adulthood and suggest
avenues for early detection and prevention of accelerated aging.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glaa122 
PMCID: PMC7302166 [Available on 2021-05-18]
PMID: 32421783 

