
1. PLoS One. 2020 Mar 5;15(3):e0229417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229417.
eCollection 2020.

Biochemical, genetic and transcriptional characterization of multibacteriocin
production by the anti-pneumococcal dairy strain Streptococcus infantarius LP90.

Campanero C(1), Muñoz-Atienza E(1), Diep DB(2), Feito J(1), Arbulu S(1), Del
Campo R(3), Nes IF(2), Hernández PE(1), Herranz C(1), Cintas LM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Seguridad y Calidad de los Alimentos por Bacterias Lácticas,
Bacteriocinas y Probióticos (Grupo SEGABALBP), Sección Departamental de Nutrición
y Ciencia de los Alimentos (Nutrición, Bromatología, Higiene y Seguridad
Alimentaria), Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid,
Spain.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Science, Norwegian University 
of Life Sciences (NMBU), Ås, Norway.
(3)Servicio de Microbiología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal & Instituto
Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, Spain.

Streptococcus pneumoniae infections are one of the major causes of morbility and 
mortality worldwide. Although vaccination and antibiotherapy constitute
fundamental and complementary strategies against pneumococcal infections, they
present some limitations including the increase in non-vaccine serotypes and the 
emergence of multidrug-resistances, respectively. Ribosomally-synthesized
antimicrobial peptides (i.e. bacteriocins) produced by Lactic Acid Bacteria (LAB)
may represent an alternative or complementary strategy to antibiotics for the
control of pneumococal infections. We tested the antimicrobial activity of 37
bacteriocinogenic LAB, isolated from food and other sources, against clinical S. 
pneumoniae strains. Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius LP90, isolated
from Venezuelan water-buffalo milk, was selected because of its broad and strong 
anti-pneumococcal spectrum. The in vitro safety assessment of S. infantarius LP90
revealed that it may be considered avirulent. The analysis of a 19,539-bp cluster
showed the presence of 29 putative open reading frames (ORFs), including the
genes encoding 8 new class II-bacteriocins, as well as the proteins involved in
their secretion, immunity and regulation. Transcriptional analyses evidenced that
the induction factor (IF) structural gene, the bacteriocin/IF transporter genes, 
the bacteriocin structural genes and most of the bacteriocin immunity genes were 
transcribed. MALDI-TOF analyses of peptides purified using different
multichromatographic procedures revealed that the dairy strain S. infantarius
LP90 produces at least 6 bacteriocins, including infantaricin A1, a novel
anti-pneumococcal two-peptide bacteriocin.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229417 
PMCID: PMC7058333
PMID: 32134941  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

