
1. J Dent Child (Chic). 2020 May 15;87(2):77-82.

Effect of Full-Mouth Rehabilitation on Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus
sobrinus Levels in Children with Severe Early Childhood Caries.

Vishwanathan S(1), Chikkanarasaiah N(2), Bilichodmath S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Vishwanathan is an assistant professor, Department of Pediatric and
Preventive Dentistry, Bangalore Institute of Dental Sciences and Hospital,
Rajarajeswari Dental College and Hospital, Bangalore, Karnataka, India;, Email:
drsoundarya13@gmail.com.
(2)Dr. Chikkanarasaiah is a professor and head, Department of Pediatric and
Preventive Dentistry, Rajarajeswari Dental College and Hospital, Bangalore,
Karnataka, India.
(3)Dr. Bilichodmath is a professor, Department of Periodontology, both at the
Rajarajeswari Dental College and Hospital, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

Purpose: To investigate the effect of full-mouth rehabilitation on the levels of 
Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus sobrinus in plaque samples of children
suffering from severe early childhood caries using the quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction method.<br/> Methods: A dental
examination was performed to determine the decayed, missing, and filled primary
teeth and surfaces (dmft and dmfs, respectively) in three- to five-year-old
children using the World Health Organization's caries diagnostic criteria.
Supragingival plaque samples were collected from all tooth surfaces with a
sterile universal scaler at baseline and six months after full-mouth
rehabilitation. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare the mean values
of dmft and dmfs scores and the mean values of S. mutans and S. sobrinus levels
between the pre- and post-treatment period.<br/> Results: At six months, the mean
relative quantification values of S. mutans and S. sobrinus showed significant
reductions (P > 0.05) in the post-treatment samples but the mean dmft scores
remained the same.<br/> Conclusion: Full-mouth rehabilitation is effective in
reducing levels of S. mutans and S. sobrinus, thus diminishing the cariogenic
challenge in the oral cavity.


PMID: 32788000  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

