
1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2020 May 19;10:222. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00222.
eCollection 2020.

A Pangenome Approach for Discerning Species-Unique Gene Markers for
Identifications of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae.

Gonzales-Siles L(1)(2)(3), Karlsson R(1)(2)(3), Schmidt P(1), Salvà-Serra
F(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Jaén-Luchoro D(1)(3), Skovbjerg S(1)(2)(3), Moore
ERB(1)(2)(3)(4), Gomila M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Centre for Antibiotic Resistance Research (CARe), University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(4)Culture Collection University of Gothenburg (CCUG), Sahlgrenska Academy,
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)Department of Biology-Microbiology, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma,
Spain.

Correct identifications of isolates and strains of the Mitis-Group of the genus
Streptococcus are particularly difficult, due to high genetic similarity,
resulting from horizontal gene transfer and homologous recombination, and
unreliable phenotypic and genotypic biomarkers for differentiating the species.
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus pseudopneumoniae are the most closely 
related species of the clade. In this study, publicly-available genome sequences 
for Streptococcus pneumoniae and S. pseudopneumoniae were analyzed, using a
pangenomic approach, to find candidates for species-unique gene markers; ten
species-unique genes for S. pneumoniae and nine for S. pseudopneumoniae were
identified. These species-unique gene marker candidates were verified by PCR
assays for identifying S. pneumoniae and S. pseudopneumoniae strains isolated
from clinical samples. All determined species-level unique gene markers for S.
pneumoniae were detected in all S. pneumoniae clinical isolates, whereas fewer of
the unique S. pseudopneumoniae gene markers were present in more than 95% of the 
clinical isolates. In parallel, taxonomic identifications of the clinical
isolates were confirmed, using conventional optochin sensitivity testing,
targeted PCR-detection for the "Xisco" gene, as well as genomic ANIb similarity
analyses for the genome sequences of selected strains. Using mass
spectrometry-proteomics, species-specific peptide matches were observed for four 
of the S. pneumoniae gene markers and for three of the S. pseudopneumoniae gene
markers. Application of multiple species-level unique biomarkers of S. pneumoniae
and S. pseudopneumoniae, is proposed as a protocol for the routine clinical
laboratory for improved, reliable differentiation, and identification of these
pathogenic and commensal species.

Copyright © 2020 Gonzales-Siles, Karlsson, Schmidt, Salvà-Serra, Jaén-Luchoro,
Skovbjerg, Moore and Gomila.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2020.00222 
PMCID: PMC7248185
PMID: 32509595 

