
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2020 Sep;117:104822. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104822. Epub
2020 Jun 20.

Antimicrobial and protective effects of non-thermal plasma treatments on the
performance of a resinous liner.

Nagay BE(1), Bitencourt SB(2), Commar BC(2), da Silva EVF(2), Dos Santos DM(2),
Rangel EC(3), Goiato MC(2), Del Bel Cury AA(1), Ricomini-Filho AP(4), Barão
VAR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontology, University of Campinas
(UNICAMP), Piracicaba Dental School, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(2)Department of Dental Materials and Prosthodontics, São Paulo State University 
(UNESP), School of Dentistry, Araçatuba, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Technological Plasmas, São Paulo State University (UNESP),
Institute of Science and Technology, Sorocaba, Brazil.
(4)Department of Biosciences, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Piracicaba Dental
School, Piracicaba, Brazil.
(5)Department of Prosthodontics and Periodontology, University of Campinas
(UNICAMP), Piracicaba Dental School, Piracicaba, Brazil. Electronic address:
vbarao@unicamp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Overcoming substantial shortcomings of soft liners as physico-chemical
changes and liner-biofilm-related infections remains a challenge in the
rehabilitation treatment. In this study, protective non-thermal plasma (NTP)
treatments were developed on the soft liner surface to improve its surface and
physico-chemical properties and to reduce fungal colonization after biofilm
inhibition challenge.
METHODS: Resinous liner specimens (Coe-Soft) were prepared and distributed in 3
groups according to the surface treatments: (1) untreated (control); (2) treated 
with sulfur hexafluoride-based NTP (SF6); and (3) treated with
hexamethyldisiloxane-based NTP (HMDSO). To test the NTP stability and their
protective and antimicrobial effect on the liner surface over time, the
morphology, chemical composition, roughness, water contact angle, shore A
hardness, sorption and solubility were evaluated before and after the specimens
were exposed to dual-species biofilm of Candida albicans and Streptococcus oralis
for 14 days. Colony forming units and biofilm structure were assessed. Data were 
submitted to ANOVA and Tukey tests (α = 0.05).
RESULTS: Both treatments modified the surface morphology, increased
hydrophobicity and roughness of the liner, and were effective to reduce C.
albicans adhesion without affecting the commensal health-associated S. oralis.
HMDSO presented chemical stability and lower hardness in both periods, whereas
SF6 exhibited higher initial hardness than control and the highest sorption;
contrarily, similar solubility was noted for all groups.
CONCLUSION: HMDSO-based film showed improved physico-chemical properties and
inhibited C. albicans biofilm. Thus, it has potential for use to control
candida-related stomatitis and improve liner's stability even after being exposed
to biofilm inhibition challenge.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104822 
PMID: 32592931 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.

