
1. J Dent Res. 2020 Aug 6:22034520946320. doi: 10.1177/0022034520946320. [Epub ahead
of print]

Modulatory Effect of Glycated Collagen on Oral Streptococcal Nanoadhesion.

Schuh CMAP(1), Benso B(2), Naulin PA(3), Barrera NP(3), Bozec L(4), Aguayo
S(2)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Medicina Regenerativa, Facultad de Medicina Clínica
Alemana-Universidad del Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(2)School of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(5)Institute for Biological and Medical Engineering, Schools of Engineering,
Medicine and Biological Sciences, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

Biofilm-mediated oral diseases such as dental caries and periodontal disease
remain highly prevalent in populations worldwide. Biofilm formation initiates
with the attachment of primary colonizers onto surfaces, and in the context of
caries, the adhesion of oral streptococci to dentinal collagen is crucial for
biofilm progression. It is known that dentinal collagen suffers from
glucose-associated crosslinking as a function of aging or disease; however, the
effect of collagen crosslinking on the early adhesion and subsequent biofilm
formation of relevant oral streptococci remains unknown. Therefore, the aim of
this work was to determine the impact of collagen glycation on the initial
adhesion of primary colonizers such as Streptococcus mutans UA159 and
Streptococcus sanguinis SK 36, as well as its effect on the early stages of
streptococcal biofilm formation in vitro. Type I collagen matrices were
crosslinked with either glucose or methylglyoxal. Atomic force microscopy
nanocharacterization revealed morphologic and mechanical changes within the
collagen matrix as a function of crosslinking, such as a significantly increased 
elastic modulus in crosslinked fibrils. Increased nanoadhesion forces were
observed for S. mutans on crosslinked collagen surfaces as compared with the
control, and retraction curves obtained for both streptococcal strains
demonstrated nanoscale unbinding behavior consistent with bacterial
adhesin-substrate coupling. Overall, glucose-crosslinked substrates specifically 
promoted the initial adhesion, biofilm formation, and insoluble extracellular
polysaccharide production of S. mutans, while methylglyoxal treatment reduced
biofilm formation for both strains. Changes in the adhesion behavior and biofilm 
formation of oral streptococci as a function of collagen glycation could help
explain the biofilm dysbiosis seen in older people and patients with diabetes.
Further studies are necessary to determine the influence of collagen crosslinking
on the balance between acidogenic and nonacidogenic streptococci to aid in the
development of novel preventive and therapeutic treatment against dental caries
in these patients.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034520946320 
PMID: 32758105 

