
1. BMC Nephrol. 2020 Jan 31;21(1):40. doi: 10.1186/s12882-020-1694-2.

Diagnostic and treatment challenge of unrecognized subacute bacterial
endocarditis associated with ANCA-PR3 positive immunocomplex glomerulonephritis: 
a case report and literature review.

Bele D(1), Kojc N(2), Perše M(2)(3), Černe Čerček A(4)(5), Lindič J(5)(6), Aleš
Rigler A(6), Večerić-Haler Ž(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, General Hospital Novo mesto, Novo mesto, Slovenia.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)Medical Experimental Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
zeljka.vecerichaler@kclj.si.
(8)Department of Nephrology, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana,
Slovenia. zeljka.vecerichaler@kclj.si.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis and treatment of either ANCA disease or silent
infection-related glomerulonephritis is complicated and is a huge treatment
challenge when overlapping clinical manifestations occur. We report a case of
ANCA-PR3 glomerulonephritis, nervous system involvement, hepatosplenomegaly and
clinically silent subacute infectious endocarditis.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 57-year-old man with known mitral valve prolaps was admitted
for unexplained renal failure with signs of nephritic syndrome,
hepatosplenomegaly, sudden unilateral hearing loss, vertigo, malaise, new onset
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Immunoserology revealed positive
c-anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibody (ANCA)/anti-proteinase 3 (anti-PR3), mixed
type crioglobulinemia and lowered complement fraction C3. Head MRI showed many
microscopic hemorrhages. Common site of infection, as well as solid malignoma
were ruled out. In accordance with clinical and laboratory findings, systemic
vasculitis was assumed, although the etiology remained uncertain
(ANCA-associated, cryoglobulinemic or related to unrecognized infection). After
kidney biopsy, clinical signs of sepsis appeared. Blood cultures revealed
Streptococcus cristatus. Echocardiography showed mitral valve endocarditis.
Kidney biopsy revealed proliferative, necrotizing immunocomplex
glomerulonephritis. Half a year later, following intravenous immunoglobulins,
glucocorticoids, antibiotic therapy and surgical valve repair, the creatinine
level decreased and c-ANCA and cryoglobulins disappeared. A second kidney biopsy 
revealed no residual kidney disease. Four years after treatment, the patient is
stable with no symptoms or signs of vasculitis recurrence.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we describe the diagnostic and treatment challenge in a patient
with unrecognized subacute bacterial endocarditis associated with ANCA-PR3
immunocomplex proliferative and crescentic glomerulonephritis. In patients with
ANCA-PR3 immunocomplex glomerulonephritis and other overlapping manifestations
suggesting systemic disease, it is important to recognize and aggressively treat 
any possible coexisting bacterial endocarditis, This is the most important step
for a favorable patient outcome, including complete clinical and
pathohistological resolution of the glomerulonephritis.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-020-1694-2 
PMCID: PMC6995228
PMID: 32005179 

