
1. Heart. 2020 Aug 26. pii: heartjnl-2020-317034. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-317034.
[Epub ahead of print]

Pathogen influence on epidemiology, diagnostic evaluation and management of
infective endocarditis.

Talha KM(1), DeSimone DC(2)(3)(4), Sohail MR(2)(3)(4), Baddour LM(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine and Science,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA talha.khawaja@mayo.edu.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine and Science,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine and Science, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine and
Science, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Infective endocarditis (IE) is uncommon and has, in the past, been most often
caused by viridans group streptococci (VGS). Due to the indolent nature of these 
organisms, the phrase 'subacute bacterial endocarditis', so-called 'SBE', was
routinely used as it characterised the clinical course of most patients that
extended for weeks to months. However, in more recent years, there has been a
significant shift in the microbiology of IE with the emergence of staphylococci
as the most frequent pathogens, and for IE due to Staphylococcus aureus, the
clinical course is acute and can be associated with sepsis. Moreover, increases
in IE due to enterococci have occurred and have been characterised by
treatment-related complications and worse outcomes. These changes in pathogen
distribution have been attributed to a diversification in the target population
at risk of IE. While prosthetic valve endocarditis and history of IE remain at
highest risk of IE, the rise in prevalence of injection drug use, intracardiac
device implantations and other healthcare exposures have heavily contributed to
the existing pool of at-risk patients. This review focuses on common IE pathogens
and their impact on the clinical profile of IE.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-317034 
PMID: 32847941 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: LMB−consultant, Boston
Scientific. SM−Medtronic, Spectranetics, Boston Scientific.

