
1. Indian J Dent Res. 2020 Jan-Feb;31(1):73-79. doi: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_432_18.

Correlation of streptococcus mutans and streptococcus sobrinus colonization with 
and without caries experience in preschool children.

Veena RL(1), Nagarathna C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Rajarajeswari Dental
College and Hospital, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India.

Background and Objectives: The aciduric mutans streptococci (MS) group, including
Streptococcus mutans (SM) and Streptococcus sobrinus (SS), is highly cariogenic. 
Relationship between increments in dental caries and the presence of these
species is not yet clarified. It is of great importance to separately determine
the presence of these two species for understanding their role in dental caries, 
accurate prediction, and effective prevention. Hence, this study was undertaken
to detect the presence of SM and SS in plaque samples of caries-free (CF), early 
childhood caries (ECC), and severe early childhood caries (S-ECC) and also to
compare the possible relationship between these species with the occurrence of
ECC.
Materials and Method: In all, 120 healthy children between 3 and 6 years of age
were randomly allocated into three groups: Group A (n = 40) CF, Group B (n = 40) 
ECC, and Group C (n = 40) S-ECC. Plaque samples were collected from all
approximal surface and gingivobuccal surfaces of teeth using a sterile universal 
scaler and dmft/dmfs scores were taken. The presence of SM and SS was evaluated
using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
Results: The presence of SM in CF, ECC, and S-ECC was 10.0%, 27.5%, and 42.5%,
respectively, and SS was 5.0%, 40.0%, and 47.5% in CF, ECC, and S-ECC,
respectively. Comparison of mean relative quantification (RQ) values of SM
between three study groups showed significant results between CF and S-ECC at P
value 0.003. Comparison of mean RQ values of SS showed significant results
between CF to ECC and CF to S-ECC at P value <0.001. This study showed
significant results between the mean dmft/dmfs scores in three study groups and
the presence of high levels of SM and SS in ECC and S-ECC groups. However, the
study showed weak positive correlation between dmfs scores and both SM and SS
species in ECC and S-ECC.
Interpretations and Conclusion: Higher levels of SS were more closely related to 
the caries-active lesions leading to severity of dental disease, that is, both in
ECC and S-ECC. There was significant difference between mean dmft/dmfs scores in 
three study groups and it also showed positive correlation between dmfs scores
and SM and SS colonization in ECC and S-ECC status.

DOI: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_432_18 
PMID: 32246686  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

