
1. J Med Microbiol. 2020 Apr;69(4):605-616. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.001170.

Purification and characterization of nisin P produced by a strain of
Streptococcus gallolyticus.

Aldarhami A(1)(2), Felek A(3)(1), Sharma V(1), Upton M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health: Medicine, Dentistry and Human Sciences. University of
Plymouth, Plymouth, UK.
(2)Clinical Laboratory Sciences Department, Turabah University College, Taif
University, Turabah, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Present address: National Institute for Biological Standards and Control,
Potters Bar, UK.

Introduction. Against the backdrop of increasing resistance to conventional
antibiotics, bacteriocins represent an attractive alternative, given their potent
activity, novel modes of action and perceived lack of issues with resistance.Aim.
In this study, the nature of the antibacterial activity of a clinical isolate of 
Streptococcus gallolyticus was investigated.Methods. Optimization of the
production of an inhibitor from strain AB39 was performed using different broth
media and supplements. Purification was carried out using size exclusion, ion
exchange and HPLC. Gel diffusion agar overlay, MS/MS, de novo peptide sequencing 
and genome mining were used in a proteogenomics approach to facilitate
identification of the genetic basis for production of the inhibitor.Results.
Strain AB39 was identified as representing Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp.
pasteurianus and the successful production and purification of the AB39 peptide, 
named nisin P, with a mass of 3133.78 Da, was achieved using BHI broth with 10 % 
serum. Nisin P showed antibacterial activity towards clinical isolates of
drug-resistant bacteria, including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus,
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus and penicillin-resistant Streptococcus
pneumoniae. In addition, the peptide exhibited significant stability towards high
temperature, wide pH and certain proteolytic enzymes and displayed very low
toxicity towards sheep red blood cells and Vero cells.Conclusion. To the best of 
our knowledge, this study represents the first production, purification and
characterization of nisin P. Further study of nisin P may reveal its potential
for treating or preventing infections caused by antibiotic-resistant
Gram-positive bacteria, or those evading vaccination regimens.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.001170 
PMID: 32125268  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

