
1. ISME J. 2020 Sep 30. doi: 10.1038/s41396-020-00789-7. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct interactions with commensal streptococci modify intercellular
communication behaviors of Streptococcus mutans.

Kaspar JR(1)(2), Lee K(3), Richard B(3), Walker AR(3), Burne RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA. Kaspar.17@osu.edu.
(2)Division of Biosciences, College of Dentistry, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA. Kaspar.17@osu.edu.
(3)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.

The formation of dental caries is a complex process that ultimately leads to
damage of the tooth enamel from acids produced by microbes in attached biofilms. 
The bacterial interactions occurring within these biofilms between cariogenic
bacteria, such as the mutans streptococci, and health-associated commensal
streptococci, are thought to be critical determinants of health and disease. To
better understand these interactions, a Streptococcus mutans reporter strain that
actively monitors cell-cell communication via peptide signaling was cocultured
with different commensal streptococci. Signaling by S. mutans, normally highly
active in monoculture, was completely inhibited by several species of commensals,
but only when the bacteria were in direct contact with S. mutans. We identified a
novel gene expression pattern that occurred in S. mutans when cultured directly
with these commensals. Finally, mutant derivatives of commensals lacking
previously shown antagonistic gene products displayed wild-type levels of signal 
inhibition in cocultures. Collectively, these results reveal a novel pathway(s)
in multiple health-associated commensal streptococci that blocks peptide
signaling and induces a common contact-dependent pattern of differential gene
expression in S. mutans. Understanding the molecular basis for this inhibition
will assist in the rational design of new risk assessments, diagnostics, and
treatments for the most pervasive oral infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-020-00789-7 
PMID: 32999420 

