
1. Dent Res J (Isfahan). 2020 Mar 17;17(2):134-141. eCollection 2020 Mar-Apr.

Streptococcus mutans, sugar consumption, and oral hygiene: Which one has more
effect on decayed, missing, and filled teeth (DMFT) score in Iranian adults?

Babaeekhou L(1), Mehrizi AA(2), Ghane M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Islamshahr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Islamshahr,
Iran.
(2)Malaria and Vector Research Group (MVRG), Biotechnology Research Center (BRC),
Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.

Background: Streptococcus mutans as an acid-generator of biofilm, sugar as a
caries-conducive environment, and oral hygiene have been implicated as major
etiological agents in dental caries. This study was designed to assess the
association and impact of S. mutans, sugar consumption, and tooth brushing on
decayed, missing, and filled teeth (DMFT) score in Iranian 20-30-year-old
individuals and compare the effect of the three mentioned factors to find the
most effective one.
Materials and Methods: In this cross-sectional study, 459 adults completed a
Sugar Frequency Questionnaire and were examined for dental caries using DMFT
index, sugar consumption level, and tooth brushing frequency per day. Saliva and 
plaque samples were collected, and the target population without Streptococcus
sobrinus in their microbial oral community was selected using polymerase chain
reaction technique. Data were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance and
multiple linear regression tests (α = 0.05).
Results: Nearly 77.1% of the study population were harboring S. mutans. Mean DMFT
of the population was 6.62. Mean comparison analysis showed that there is a
strong relationship between S. mutans existence in mouth flora and DMFT scores (P
< 0.0001). Multiple linear regression test showed higher percentage of S. mutans 
contribution (28.2%) in DMFT score changes than sugar consumption (3.6%) and
tooth brushing (0.7%).
Conclusion: This study provides a recent report from S. mutans frequency and DMFT
score in Iranian adult population. It is also the first study that shows
significantly higher impact of S. mutans in microbial population of mouth
microflora on caries development than sugar consumption and oral hygiene.
Accordingly, S. mutans screening program should be more highlighted in preventive
strategies.

Copyright: © 2020 Dental Research Journal.


PMCID: PMC7224268
PMID: 32435436 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest, real or perceived, financial or non-financial in
this article.

