
1. Int J Nanomedicine. 2020 Aug 6;15:5813-5824. doi: 10.2147/IJN.S254860.
eCollection 2020.

Synthesis of Graphene Oxide Using Atmospheric Plasma for Prospective Biological
Applications.

Alam K(#)(1), Jo YY(#)(2), Park CK(3), Cho H(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Materials Science & Engineering, Chonnam National University,
Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Gachon University, Gil Medical
Center, Incheon 21565, Republic of Korea.
(3)Gachon Pain Center and Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Gachon
University, Incheon 21999, Republic of Korea.
(#)Contributed equally

Introduction: This paper presents a novel technique for the synthesis of graphene
oxide (GO) with various surface features using high-density atmospheric plasma
deposition. Furthermore, to investigate the use of hydrophobic,
super-hydrophobic, and hydrophilic graphene in biological applications, we
synthesized hydrophobic, super-hydrophobic, and hydrophilic graphene oxides by
additional heat treatment and argon plasma treatment, respectively. In contrast
to conventional fabrication procedures, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) formed under
low pressure and high-temperature environment using a new synthesis
method-developed and described in this study-offers a convenient deposition
method on any kind surface with controlled wettability.
Methods: High density at atmospheric plasma is used for the synthesis of rGO and 
GO and its biocompatibility based on various wetting properties was evaluated
using MTT (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) assay,
and the viability of cells in response to rGO and GO with various surface
features was investigated. Structural integrity was characterized by Raman
spectroscopy, FESEM and FE-TEM. Wettability was measured via contact angle method
and confirmed with XPS analysis.
Results: We found that GO coating with a hydrophilic feature is more
biocompatible than other surfaces as observed in case of fibroblast cells. We
have shown that wettability-controlled by GO deposition-influences
biocompatibilities and antibacterial effect of biomaterial surfaces.
Discussion: Measuring the contact angle, it is found that contact angle for
hydrophobic is increased to 150.590 and reduced to 11.580 by heat and argon
plasma treatment, respectively, from 75.880 that was initially in the case of
hydrophobic surface. XPS analysis confirmed various oxygen-containing functional 
groups transforming as deposited hydrophobic surface into superhydrophobic and
hydrophilic surface. Thus, we have proposed a new, direct, cost-effective, and
highly productive method for the synthesis of rGO and GO-with various surface
properties-for biological applications. Similarly, for the dental implant
application, the Streptococcus mutans was used as an antibacterial effect and
found that S. mutans grows slowly on hydrophilic surface. Thus, antibacterial
effect was prominent on GO with hydrophilic surface.

© 2020 Alam et al.

DOI: 10.2147/IJN.S254860 
PMCID: PMC7418166
PMID: 32821103  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in
this work.

