
1. Am J Case Rep. 2019 Dec 24;20:1930-1935. doi: 10.12659/AJCR.918192.

A Case of Infected Left Atrial Myxoma Presenting as ST-Elevation Myocardial
Infarction (STEMI).

Peters MJ(1), Tuwairqi KW(2), Farah MG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center,
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Harrington Heart and Vascular Institute, University Hospitals Cleveland
Medical Center, Cleveland, OH, USA.

BACKGROUND Although left atrial myxoma is the most common benign primary cardiac 
tumor, infected atrial myxoma is rare. This report presents a case of infected
left atrial myxoma with embolization to the left anterior descending (LAD)
coronary artery, which was identified following an initial presentation with
ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). CASE REPORT A 34-year-old man with a 
history of smoking tobacco and intravenous cocaine use presented to the emergency
room with symptoms of a feeling of pressure on the chest and symptoms in the left
arm. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST elevation in leads II, III, aVF, and
V3-V5, consistent with an anterior-inferior STEMI. He underwent percutaneous
intervention (PCI) with two drug-eluting stents to the mid-distal LAD coronary
artery. The patient also had fever, chills, a history of weight loss, and signs
of peripheral emboli. Blood cultures identified Gram-positive Streptococcus
parasanguinis, a member of the Streptococcus viridans group. Transesophageal
echocardiogram (TEE) identified a large, mobile, pedunculated left atrial mass
protruding into the mitral valve in diastole and mitral valve vegetations.
Surgical excision and the histology confirmed a diagnosis of benign left atrial
myxoma containing Gram-positive cocci. The patient required mitral valve
replacement and a postoperative two-week course of gentamicin and a six-week
course of ceftriaxone CONCLUSIONS A rare case is reported of infected left atrial
myxoma presenting as STEMI secondary to coronary artery embolization, which was
treated with PCI, antibiotics, and mitral valve replacement.

DOI: 10.12659/AJCR.918192 
PMCID: PMC7209967
PMID: 31871313  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

