
1. Ital J Pediatr. 2020 Jul 14;46(1):97. doi: 10.1186/s13052-020-00863-y.

Abscess of the clivus in an adolescent with complicated acute rhinosinusitis: a
case report.

Solimeno L(1)(2), Torretta S(3)(4), Marchisio P(3)(5), Iofrida E(3), Bosis S(3), 
Tagliabue C(3), Di Pietro GM(5), Pignataro L(3)(4), Guastella C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via F. Sforza
35,20122, Milan, Italy. ls.solimeno@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy. ls.solimeno@gmail.com.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Via F. Sforza
35,20122, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan,
Milan, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Complications of acute sinusitis affecting multiple sites are very
uncommon, and generally develop for a delayed diagnosis of the primary infection,
with possible severe and life-threatening evolution. Patients can have variable
presentations according to the site and extent of the infection. Multiple forms
generally include the coexistence of orbital manifestations and intracranial
infections. We here present a case with unusual multiple sites locations (i.e.:
intraorbital intraconic abscess, sigmoid sinus thrombosis, preclival abscess,
multiple splanchnocranium osteomyelitic processes).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 13-year-old male presented at our hospital with right
progressive orbital oedema with eyesight worsening and signs of meningitis.
Computed tomography and magnetic resonance (MRI) demonstrated right intraorbital 
intraconic abscess, left sphenoidal sinusitis, transverse and sigmoid sinus
thrombosis. Ophthalmologic evaluation documented a right optic nerve sufferance. 
Endoscopic and superior right trans-palpebral surgical decompression was
performed, and the abscess was drained. Microbiological analysis revealed the
presence of multi-sensitive Streptococcus Intermedius. Subsequent prolonged
antibiotic and anti-thrombotic treatments were started. In the following
two-weeks the sinusal and ophthalmologic clinical conditions improved, whereas
the patients complained of mild to moderate cervical pain and suffered from
intermittent pyrexia. Control MRI documented clival abscess extending up to
preclival soft tissues posterior to the nasopharynx, associated with mandible
osteomyelitis, occipital condyles and anterior part of the temporal bone hyper
intensity. Endoscopic trans-nasal surgical approach to the clival compartment
with neurosurgery navigation-guided achieved preclival abscess drainage. Complete
clinical and radiological recovery was achieved after 45 days of medical
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple sites complicated rhinosinusitis is uncommon, and its
management is challenging. A proper history and thorough clinical examination
along with a radiological evaluation are key factors in the final diagnosis of
patients with complicated multiple sites acute rhinosinusitis. A quick
multidisciplinary approach is always necessary to avoid unwanted life-threatening
complications.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-020-00863-y 
PMCID: PMC7362412
PMID: 32665003 

