
1. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc. 2020 Sep 21. pii: piaa101. doi:
10.1093/jpids/piaa101. [Epub ahead of print]

Suppurative Intracranial Complications of Pediatric Sinusitis: A Single-Center
Experience.

Otto WR(1), Paden WZ(2), Connors M(3), Joerger T(1), Buzi A(4), Rizzi M(4), Huh
J(5), Storm P(3)(6), Heuer G(3)(6), Kennedy B(3)(6), McGuire J(7), Swami S(1),
Lang SS(3)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Center for Data Driven Discovery in Biomedicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Otolaryngology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Otolaryngology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and the University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Division of Neurosurgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Neurosurgery, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(7)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of
Neurology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

BACKGROUND: Suppurative intracranial complications of sinusitis are rare events
in children and can lead to harmful neurologic sequelae and significant
morbidity. We sought to review the presentation and management of patients
admitted at our hospital with these conditions.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of pediatric patients admitted to a
quaternary children's hospital from 2007 to 2019 for operative management of
sinusitis with intracranial extension. Clinical characteristics, including
surgical and microbiological data, were collected and analyzed.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients were included; the median age was 11.0 years, and
there was a male predominance. Eighty-nine percent of patients had prior
healthcare visits for the current episode of sinusitis; 46% of patients had an
abnormal neurologic exam on admission. Epidural abscess and subdural empyema were
the most common complications, and subdural empyema was associated with repeat
surgical intervention. The dominant pathogens were Streptococcus anginosus group 
organisms (74%). The majority of patients completed treatment parenterally, with 
a median duration of therapy of 35 days. Neurological sequelae, including
epilepsy or ongoing focal deficits, occurred in 22% of patients. History of
seizure or an abnormal neurological exam at admission were associated with
neurological sequelae.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should consider intracranial complications of sinusitis
in patients with symptoms of sinusitis for >1 week. Patients should undergo
urgent neuroimaging, as neurosurgical intervention is essential for these
patients. Subdural empyema was associated with repeat neurosurgical intervention.
Neurological sequelae occurred in 22% of patients, and new onset seizure or an
abnormal neurological exam at admission were associated with neurological
sequelae.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Journal of the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jpids/piaa101 
PMID: 32955086 

