
1. Cureus. 2020 Mar 22;12(3):e7365. doi: 10.7759/cureus.7365.

Rare Complication of Interventional Radiology-guided Arterial Embolization of the
Gastroduodenal Artery in the Setting of Acute Gastrointestinal Bleed: Migrated
Coils in the Duodenum.

Kudaravalli P(1), Saleem SA(2), Pendela VS(3), Arif MO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, USA.
(2)Gastroenterology, State University of New York (SUNY) Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, USA.
(3)Internal Medicine, Rochester General Hospital, Rochester, USA.

A 91-year-old male presented to the emergency room with hemodynamically
significant upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The patient underwent an
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), which showed frank blood in the duodenum
interfering with the visualization. Hence, the patient underwent urgent
interventional radiology (IR)-guided arteriogram and embolization. An EGD done 48
hours later showed a giant, non-bleeding, cratered duodenal ulcer with a visible 
vessel and vascular coils partially protruding into the duodenal bulb lumen. The 
patient had no evidence of bleeding post embolization. The patient presented
three months later with abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) abdomen showed
multiple liver abscesses. IR-guided drainage of abscesses was performed, and the 
culture grew Streptococcus intermedius. Magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP), and barium enema were unremarkable. The patient was treated with a
prolonged course of intravenous (IV) antibiotics and recovered without any
further issues. IR guided arterial embolization can be lifesaving in cases where 
GI bleeding cannot be controlled endoscopically, however, it can lead to serious 
complications, including endovascular coil migration into the gastrointestinal
(GI) lumen causing infection and re-bleeding. Endovascular coil migration can
occur immediately or several years later, which can result in fatal bleeding and 
infection. The best approach to prevent and manage migrated endovascular coils in
the GI lumen remains unclear.

Copyright © 2020, Kudaravalli et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.7365 
PMCID: PMC7174856
PMID: 32328377 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

