
1. PLoS One. 2020 Aug 25;15(8):e0237603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237603.
eCollection 2020.

Characterization of baseline polybacterial versus monobacterial infections in
three randomized controlled bacterial conjunctivitis trials and microbial
outcomes with besifloxacin ophthalmic suspension 0.6.

DeCory HH(1), Sanfilippo CM(1), Proskin HM(2), Blondeau JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Affairs, Bausch + Lomb, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(2)Howard M. Proskin & Associates, Rochester, New York, United States of America.
(3)Clinical Microbiology, Royal University Hospital, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: To date, studies examining polymicrobial infections in ocular
disease have mostly been limited to keratitis or endophthalmitis. We
characterized polybacterial infections compared to monobacterial infections in
prior clinical studies evaluating besifloxacin ophthalmic suspension 0.6% for the
treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis and report on associated microbiological
outcomes.
METHODS: In this post-hoc analysis, microbiological data for subjects with
conjunctivitis due to one or more than one bacterial species in three previous
studies (two vehicle-, one active-controlled) of besifloxacin were extracted.
Bacterial species identified at baseline were deemed causative if their colony
count equaled or exceeded species-specific prespecified threshold criteria. In
subjects with polybacterial infections, the fold-increase over threshold was used
to rank order the contribution of individual species. Baseline pathogens and
their minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for common ophthalmic antibiotics 
were compared by infection type, as were microbial eradication rates following
treatment with besifloxacin.
RESULTS: Of 1041 subjects with culture-confirmed conjunctivitis, 17% had
polybacterial and 83% had monobacterial conjunctivitis at baseline. In
polybacterial compared to monobacterial infections, Haemophilus influenzae and
Streptococcus pneumoniae were identified less frequently as the dominant
infecting species (P = 0.042 and P<0.001, respectively), whereas Streptococcus
mitis/S. mitis group was identified more frequently as dominant (P<0.001). Viral 
coinfection was also identified more frequently in polybacterial infections
(P<0.001). Staphylococcus aureus was the most common coinfecting species in
polybacterial infections and the second most common dominant species in such
infections. With few exceptions, MICs for individual species were comparable
regardless of infection type. Clinical microbial eradication rates with
besifloxacin were high regardless of infection type (P≤0.016 vs vehicle at
follow-up visits).
CONCLUSIONS: Approximately one in five subjects with bacterial conjunctivitis are
infected with more than one bacterial species underscoring the need for a
broad-spectrum antibiotic for such infections. Besifloxacin treatment resulted in
robust eradication rates of these infections comparable to monobacterial
infections.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT000622908, NCT00347932, NCT00348348.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0237603 
PMCID: PMC7447040
PMID: 32841261 

Conflict of interest statement: HD and CS are employees of Bausch Health US, LLC;
Dr. H Proskin is an independent statistical consultant and reports receipt of
statistical consultation fees from Bausch Health US, LLC for this work. Dr. J
Blondeau has no disclosures to report for this current study. This research is
associated with the marketed product Besivance® (besifloxacin ophthalmic
suspension, 0.6%; Bausch & Lomb Incorporated; Rochester, NY). This does not alter
our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.

