
1. World J Oncol. 2020 Apr;11(2):72-75. doi: 10.14740/wjon1260. Epub 2020 Mar 29.

A Unique Presentation of Spontaneous Compartment Syndrome due to Acquired
Hemophilia A and Associated Malignancy: Case Report and Literature Review.

Alidoost M(1), Conte GA(1), Chaudry R(1), Nahum K(1), Marchesani D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Hackensack
Meridian Health, Neptune, NJ 07753, USA.

Hemophilia is a bleeding diathesis that is most commonly congenital and causes a 
tendency for significant bleeding during procedures and often manifests as
hemarthrosis. However, more rarely, hemophilia can be acquired. Our paper focuses
on acquired hemophilia A (AHA), which is caused by the development of an
autoantibody (an inhibitor) to factor VIII. A 61-year-old man with a past medical
history of type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
hypothyroidism, and obstructive sleep apnea presented to the emergency department
with severe right lower extremity pain and swelling of 2-day duration. He was
found to have compartment syndrome and underwent emergent fasciotomy of his right
leg. After surgery he still had significant bleeding, despite transfusions and
administration of fresh frozen plasma (FFP) by the surgical team. He was later
diagnosed with AHA, but was not adequately responsive to factor VII, factor VIII,
steroids nor rituxan and unfortunately had his right lower extremity amputated.
He had a prolonged hospital course, which included Streptococcus bovis bacteremia
and a code stroke for which head computed tomography (CT) showed probable
metastasis. It was acknowledged he had probable metastatic colon cancer, which
was not confirmed as the patient transitioned to hospice care. Rather than
hemarthrosis, patients with AHA tend to have bleeding in soft tissue or the
gastrointestinal tract. AHA can have underlying causes, such as malignancy. AHA
associated with malignancy is associated with poorer outcomes and tends to
improve with treatment of the underlying malignancy. Therefore, it is important
to quickly identify these patients and screen them for underlying etiologies.

Copyright 2020, Alidoost et al.

DOI: 10.14740/wjon1260 
PMCID: PMC7141160
PMID: 32284775 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest regarding the publication of this paper.

