
1. Biochem J. 2020 Sep 10. pii: BCJ20200332. doi: 10.1042/BCJ20200332. [Epub ahead
of print]

Structure based virtual screening identifies small molecule effectors for the
sialoglycan binding protein Hsa.

Agarwal R(1), Bensing BA(2), Mi D(3), Vinson P(4), Baudry J(5), Iverson TM(6),
Smith JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Knoxville, Tennessee, United States.
(2)UCSF VA Medical Center, Medicine, San Francisco, United States.
(3)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, United States.
(4)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States.
(5)University of Alabama, Huntsville, Alabama, United States.
(6)Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States.

Infective endocarditis (IE) is a cardiovascular disease often caused by bacteria 
of the viridans group of streptococci, which includes Streptococcus gordonii and 
Streptococcus sanguinis. Previous research has found that serine-rich repeat
(SRR) proteins on the S. gordonii bacterial surface play a critical role in
pathogenesis by facilitating bacterial attachment to sialylated glycans displayed
on human platelets. Despite their important role in disease progression, there
are currently no anti-adhesive drugs available on the market. Here, we performed 
structure-based virtual screening using an ensemble docking approach followed by 
consensus scoring to identify novel small molecule effectors against the
sialoglycan binding domain of the SRR adhesin protein Hsa from the S. gordonii
strain DL1. The screening successfully predicted nine compounds which were able
to displace the native ligand (sialyl-T antigen) in an in vitro assay and bind
competitively to Hsa. Furthermore, hierarchical clustering based on the MACCS
fingerprints showed that eight of these small molecules do not share a common
scaffold with the native ligand. This study indicates that SRR family of adhesin 
proteins can be inhibited by diverse small molecules and thus prevent the
interaction of the protein with the sialoglycans. This opens new avenues for
discovering potential drugs against infective endocarditis.

Copyright 2020 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1042/BCJ20200332 
PMID: 32910185 

