
1. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 Sep 2. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00314. [Epub ahead of
print]

A Cyclic di-GMP Network Is Present in Gram-Positive Streptococcus and
Gram-Negative Proteus Species.

Liu Y, Lee C, Li F, Trček J(1), Bähre H(2), Guo RT(3), Chen CC(3), Chernobrovkin 
A, Zubarev R(4), Römling U.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Department of Biology, University
of Maribor, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
(2)Research Core Unit Metabolomics, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 Hannover,
Germany.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Biocatalysis and Enzyme Engineering, Hubei
Collaborative Innovation Center for Green Transformation of Bio-Resources, Hubei 
Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences, Hubei
University, Wuhan, 430062, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Pharmacological & Technological Chemistry, I.M. Sechenov First
Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, 119146, Russia.

The ubiquitous cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) network is highly redundant with numerous
GGDEF domain proteins as diguanylate cyclases and EAL domain proteins as c-di-GMP
specific phosphodiesterases comprising those domains as two of the most abundant 
bacterial domain superfamilies. One hallmark of the c-di-GMP network is its
exalted plasticity as c-di-GMP turnover proteins can rapidly vanish from species 
within a genus and possess an above average transmissibility. To address the
evolutionary forces of c-di-GMP turnover protein maintenance, conservation, and
diversity, we investigated a Gram-positive and a Gram-negative species, which
preserved only one single clearly identifiable GGDEF domain protein. Species of
the family Morganellaceae of the order Enterobacterales exceptionally show
disappearance of the c-di-GMP signaling network, but Proteus spp. still retained 
one diguanylate cyclase. As another example, in species of the bovis, pyogenes,
and salivarius subgroups as well as Streptococcus suis and Streptococcus henryi
of the genus Streptococcus, one candidate diguanylate cyclase was frequently
identified. We demonstrate that both proteins encompass PAS (Per-ARNT-Sim)-GGDEF 
domains, possess diguanylate cyclase catalytic activity, and are suggested to
signal via a PilZ receptor domain at the C-terminus of type 2 glycosyltransferase
constituting BcsA cellulose synthases and a cellulose synthase-like protein CelA,
respectively. Preservation of the ancient link between production of
cellulose(-like) exopolysaccharides and c-di-GMP signaling indicates that this
functionality is even of high ecological importance upon maintenance of the last 
remnants of a c-di-GMP signaling network in some of today's free-living bacteria.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.0c00314 
PMID: 32786278 

