
1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2020 Jan 24. doi: 10.1007/s12602-020-09637-8.
[Epub ahead of print]

Exploring Beneficial/Virulence Properties of Two Dairy-Related Strains of
Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius.

Dos Santos KMO(1)(2), de Matos CR(2), Salles HO(2), de Melo Franco BDG(3),
Arellano K(4), Holzapfel WH(4), Todorov SD(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)EMBRAPA Agroindustria de Alimentos, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)EMBRAPA Caprinos e Ovinos, Sobral, CE, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Alimentos e Nutrição Experimental, Laboratório de
Microbiologia de Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Advanced Green Energy and Environment Institute (AGEE), Handong Global
University, Pohang, Gyungbuk, 791-708, Republic of South Korea.
(5)Departamento de Alimentos e Nutrição Experimental, Laboratório de
Microbiologia de Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, Faculdade de Ciências
Farmacêuticas, São Paulo, SP, Brazil. slavi310570@abv.bg.
(6)Advanced Green Energy and Environment Institute (AGEE), Handong Global
University, Pohang, Gyungbuk, 791-708, Republic of South Korea.
slavi310570@abv.bg.

The genus Streptococcus includes various species, remarkably different in their
behavior, applications, virulence, and safety. Taxonomically Streptococcus
infantarius subsp. infantarius belonging to the Streptococcus bovis group, which 
includes several pathogen species, however, has been found as predominant species
in some African dairy products that are widely consumed and considered to be
safe. Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius' safety may be questioned due 
to the association of this species with clinical cases. In this study, isolates
from dairy origin were selected based on their bacteriocinogenic potential and
differentiated by their RAPD-PCR profiles. Two strains were identified by 16S
rRNA sequencing as St. infantarius subsp. infantarius and investigated regarding 
their potential beneficial properties and factors related to virulence and
safety. A series of in vitro tests included properties related to survival in the
gastrointestinal tract and beneficial intestinal activities. Production of
bacteriocin/s, detection of related genes, and partial characterization of
expressed antimicrobial protein were evaluated. Genes related to folate
biosynthesis were detected in both studied strains. Evaluation of physiological
tests related to strains virulence, adhesion, and resistance to antibiotics and
detections of virulence and biogenic amines production-related genes were also
investigated. Taking in consideration all the aspects of the specific nature of
St. infantarius subsp. infantarius K1-4 and K5-1 (beneficial properties and
virulence characteristics), both strains cannot be considered safe for human or
other animals application, even though they have been isolated from dairy
products. This study is highlighting the importance of evaluation for presence of
potential virulence factors in newly characterized strains in order to be
confident in their safety.

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-020-09637-8 
PMID: 31981112 

