
1. Oral Health Prev Dent. 2020;18(3):563-570. doi: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a44693.

Probiotic Potential of Lactobacilli Isolated from Saliva of Periodontally Healthy
Individuals.

Hirasawa M, Kurita-Ochia T.

PURPOSE: To search for useful probiotics, we characterised antimicrobial lactic
acid bacteria isolated from the oral cavities of 20 healthy volunteers from Nihon
Univerisity School of Dentistry.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Oral lactobacilli were isolated from the saliva of 20
periodontally healthy volunteers using the Dentocult LB dip-slide method. Primary
antimicrobial screening of Lactobacillus isolates was performed using the paper
disk method. Each suspected antimicrobial isolate was tested against
Streptococcus mutans, S. sobrinus, and Porphyromonas gingivalis. Since P.
gingivalis is considered as a keystone bacterium, we further analysed lactic acid
bacteria that produced extracellular soluble antimicrobial agents that created an
inhibitory zone of more than 12 mm against P. gingivalis. After two rounds of
antimicrobial susceptibility testing, six isolates showing strong antibacterial
effects against P. gingivalis were selected and identified as facultatively
anaerobic, Gram-positive, non-spore-forming, non-capsule-forming, and
catalase-negative bacilli. Selected isolates were identified to the species level
through 16S rDNA sequence analyses.
RESULTS: The antimicrobial substance produced by the isolated bacilli was
inactivated slightly after catalase treatment, had significantly lower activity
at pH levels above 9.0, and was also reduced by heat treatment above 100°C and
autoclaving. The activity of the antimicrobial substance showed some resistance
to lower levels of heat, as well as pepsin and proteinase K treatments. 16S rRNA 
sequencing identified these isolates as Lactobacillus casei, Lactobacillus
fermentum, and Lactobacillus gasseri.
CONCLUSION: These bacteria are antagonistic against potential periodontal
pathogens and are good candidates for clinical application as probiotics.

DOI: 10.3290/j.ohpd.a44693 
PMID: 32515429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

