
1. Food Microbiol. 2020 Dec;92:103599. doi: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103599. Epub 2020 Jul 
26.

Characterization and pre-industrial validation of Streptococcus thermophilus
strains to be used as starter cultures for Crescenza, an Italian soft cheese.

Tidona F(1), Francolino S(2), Ghiglietti R(3), Locci F(4), Carminati D(5),
Laforce P(6), Giraffa G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
flavio.tidona@crea.gov.it.
(2)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
salvatore.francolino@crea.gov.it.
(3)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
roberta.ghiglietti@crea.gov.it.
(4)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
francesco.locci@crea.gov.it.
(5)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
domenico.carminati@crea.gov.it.
(6)Lallemand Specialty Cultures SAS, Blagnac Cedex, France. Electronic address:
plaforce@lallemand.com.
(7)Research Council for Agriculture and Economics, Research Centre for Animal
Production and Aquaculture (CREA-ZA), Lodi, Italy. Electronic address:
giorgio.giraffa@crea.gov.it.

The aim of this work was to search for new candidate strains to be included in a 
culture for Crescenza, a rindless soft cheese, today produced mainly at
industrial level using selected starter cultures composed of S. thermophilus.
Performance testing was applied to 29 pre-selected strains and a scoring approach
was developed to identify the most suitable candidates to be employed in
Crescenza cheesemaking. Eight S. thermophilus strains fulfilling most of the
desired properties (e.g., high phage resistance, fast acidification rate, no
growth below 20 °C, NaCl sensibility, no post acidification at 4 °C) were
selected. These strains were grouped in pairs to design different starter culture
formulations, which were preliminary tested for the production of Crescenza
cheeses at laboratory scale. Two couples of binary cultures (designed Phage
rotation 1 and Phage rotation 2) were finally designed and used as starters in
pilot scale cheesemaking. The combinations, especially those designed in Phage
rotation 1, appeared to be suitable for Crescenza production and showed mutual
similarity in terms of strain characteristics, technological performance, and
cheese quality. The selection method and ranking approach presented in this work 
may be adapted to other species of LAB showing traits of industrial interest.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103599 
PMID: 32950140 

