
1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2020 Sep 30. doi: 10.1111/omi.12316. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Streptococcus mutans genes involved in fluoride resistance by
screening of a transposon mutant library.

Yu J(1), Wang Y(1), Han D(1), Cao W(1), Zheng L(2), Xie Z(1), Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Industrial Fermentation Microbiology, College of
Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science & Technology, 300457, Tianjin,
China.
(2)Department of Pathogen Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China
Medical University, Shenyang, China.

Fluoride has been used as an effective anti-caries agent for more than seventy
years, which might result in the emergence of fluoride resistant strains.
However, the fluoride resistance mechanism and the cariogenic properties of
fluoride resistant mutant for cariogenic bacterial species Streptococcus mutans
remain largely unknown. We describe here the construction and characterization of
a mariner-based transposon system designed to be used in S. mutans, which is also
potentially applicable to other streptococci. To identify genetic determinants of
fluoride resistance in S. mutans, we constructed a library of S. mutans
transposon insertion mutants and screened this library to identify mutants
exhibiting fluoride resistance phenotype. Two mutants were found to carry
transposon insertion in two different genetic loci (smu.396 and smu.1291c)
respectively. Our subsequent genetic study indicates the fluoride resistant
phenotype for the mutant with the insertion in smu.1291c is resulting from the
constitutive overexpression of downstream operon smu.1290c-89c, which is
consistent with the previous reports. We also demonstrate for the first time that
the deletion of smu.396 is responsible for the fluoride resistant phenotype and
that the combining of smu1290c-89c overexpression and smu.396 deletion in one
strain could attribute an additive effect on the fluoride resistance. In
addition, our results suggest that the biological fitness of those fluoride
resistant mutants is reduced compared to that of wild-type strain. Overall, our
identification and characterization of genetic determinants responsible for
fluoride resistance in S. mutans expand our understanding of the fluoride
resistance mechanism and the biological consequence of the fluoride resistance
strains.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12316 
PMID: 33000897 

