
1. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 Jul 28. pii: S1684-1182(20)30161-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jmii.2020.07.004. [Epub ahead of print]

Clustering of Streptococcus gallolyticus subspecies pasteurianus bacteremia and
meningitis in neonates.

Chen WC(1), Lee PI(2), Lin HC(2), Chang LY(2), Lee TF(3), Chen JM(4), Hsueh
PR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pediatrics,
Changhua Christian Children's Hospital, Changhua City, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Laboratory
Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan University College
of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: cjmjhu2@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of
Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, National Taiwan
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hsporen@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Although Streptococcus gallolyticus subspecies pasteurianus
(SGSP) is a rare pathogen in children, it can cause invasive infections among
neonates and infants. Herein, we report bacteremia/meningitis caused by SGSP in
three neonates and review the literature on bacteremia and/or meningitis caused
by this organism.
METHODS: Three neonates, referred from an obstetrics clinic within a 2-month
period, presented with invasive SGSP infections. The bacterial isolates were
analyzed using Bruker Biotyper MALDI-TOF, sequencing of 16S rRNA and sodA genes
(encoding manganese dependent superoxide dismutase), and PCR restriction fragment
length polymorphism assay of groESL gene. Molecular typing was performed to
evaluate the genetic relatedness.
RESULTS: The median onset age of infection in the three neonates was 3 days
(range 2-5 days). They were delivered through cesarean section in the same
operation room under different doctors, and were cared for by different nurses.
Patient A presented with bacteremia, patient B with bacteremia and meningitis,
and patient C with meningitis. Four isolates were identified as SGSP and were
susceptible to penicillin G, cefotaxime, and vancomycin. All patients were
treated with ampicillin plus cefotaxime for 14 days, and no complications were
observed. The molecular typing results suggested that all isolates belonged to a 
single clone, which indicated the possibility of an outbreak in the obstetrics
clinic.
CONCLUSION: Infection by a rare pathogen such as SGSP in multiple patients
belonging to a single healthcare unit indicates that detailed investigation and
stringent infection control policy are necessary for preventing further outbreaks
of such diseases.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.07.004 
PMID: 32768337 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declares no conflicts of interest.

