
1. Res Vet Sci. 2020 Oct;132:426-438. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2020.07.027. Epub 2020 Aug
5.

Discrimination of major and minor streptococci incriminated in bovine mastitis by
MALDI-TOF MS fingerprinting and 16S rRNA gene sequencing.

Alnakip MEA(1), Rhouma NR(2), Abd-Elfatah EN(3), Quintela-Baluja M(4), Böhme
K(4), Fernández-No I(4), Bayoumi MA(3), Abdelhafez MM(5), Taboada-Rodríguez A(6),
Calo-Mata P(4), Barros-Velázquez J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Nutrition and Food Science, School of
Veterinary Sciences/College of Biotechnology, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Rúa Carballo Calero s/n, Campus Lugo, E-27002 Lugo, Spain; Department
of Food Control, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University, 44519,
Egypt.
(2)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Misurata University, Libya;
Department of Food science and Technology, Faculty of Agriculture, Misurata
University, Libya.
(3)Department of Food Control, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig
University, 44519, Egypt.
(4)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Nutrition and Food Science, School of
Veterinary Sciences/College of Biotechnology, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Rúa Carballo Calero s/n, Campus Lugo, E-27002 Lugo, Spain.
(5)Department of Food science and Technology, Faculty of Agriculture, Misurata
University, Libya.
(6)Food Biotechnology Group, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty of
Veterinary Sciences, Murcia university, Campus Espinardo, 30100 Murcia, Spain.
(7)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Nutrition and Food Science, School of
Veterinary Sciences/College of Biotechnology, University of Santiago de
Compostela, Rúa Carballo Calero s/n, Campus Lugo, E-27002 Lugo, Spain. Electronic
address: jorge.barros.velazquez@gmail.com.

The current work investigated the discriminatory potential of MALDI-TOF MS
fingerprinting towards most-relevant major (Streptococcus agalactiae, S.
dysgalactiae, S. uberis) and minor (S. canis, S. parauberis, S. salivarius, S.
equinus and S. gallolyticus) streptococci involved in bovine mastitis (BM), in
comparison to 16S rRNA gene sequencing (GS)-based identification. The MALDI-TOF
MS-generated spectral fingerprints were recruited for eliciting a detailed
proteomic map that demonstrated clear variability for inter- and
intra-species-specific biomarkers. Besides, a phyloproteomic dendrogram was
evolved and comparatively analyzed against the phylogenetic one obtained from 16S
rRNA GS in order to assess the differentiation of streptococci of bovine origin
based on variability of protein fingerprints versus the variation of 16S rRNA
gene homology. Results showed that the discrimination of BM-implicated
streptococci can be obtained by both approaches; however MALDI-TOF MS was
superior, achieving more variability at both intra- and sub-species levels.
MALDI-TOF MS spectral analytics revealed that Streptococcus spp. exhibited three 
genus-specific biomarkers (peaks with m/z values at 2112, 4452 and 5955) and all 
streptococci exhibited spectral variability at both species and subspecies
levels. Remarkably, MALDI-TOF MS fingerprinting was found to be at least as
robust as 16S rRNA GS-based identification, allowing much cheaper and faster
analysis, and additionally exhibiting high reliability for characterization of
BM-implicated streptococci, thus proving to be a powerful tool that can be used
independently within dairy diagnostics.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2020.07.027 
PMID: 32777539 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no conflict of interests. None of the authors of this
paper has a financial or personal relationship with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately influence or bias the content of the paper.

