
1. PLoS Pathog. 2020 Jul 27;16(7):e1008774. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008774.
eCollection 2020 Jul.

S-glutathionylation proteome profiling reveals a crucial role of a
thioredoxin-like protein in interspecies competition and cariogenecity of
Streptococcus mutans.

Li Z(1), Zhang C(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Zhou J(1)(2), Xu X(1)(2), Peng X(1), Zhou
X(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu,
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Oral Diseases, Department of Cariology and Endodontics, West China Hospital of
Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

S-glutathionylation is an important post-translational modification (PTM) process
that targets protein cysteine thiols by the addition of glutathione (GSH). This
modification can prevent proteolysis caused by the excessive oxidation of protein
cysteine residues under oxidative or nitrosative stress conditions. Recent
studies have suggested that protein S-glutathionylation plays an essential role
in the control of cell-signaling pathways by affecting the protein function in
bacteria and even humans. In this study, we investigated the effects of
S-glutathionylation on physiological regulation within Streptococcus mutans, the 
primary etiological agent of human dental caries. To determine the
S-glutathionylated proteins in bacteria, the Cys reactive isobaric reagent
iodoacetyl Tandem Mass Tag (iodoTMT) was used to label the S-glutathionylated Cys
site, and an anti-TMT antibody-conjugated resin was used to enrich the modified
peptides. Proteome profiling identified a total of 357 glutathionylated cysteine 
residues on 239 proteins. Functional enrichment analysis indicated that these
S-glutathionylated proteins were involved in diverse important biological
processes, such as pyruvate metabolism and glycolysis. Furthermore, we studied a 
thioredoxin-like protein (Tlp) to explore the effect of S-glutathionylation on
interspecies competition between oral streptococcal biofilms. Through site
mutagenesis, it was proved that glutathionylation on Cys41 residue of Tlp is
crucial to protect S. mutans from oxidative stress and compete with S. sanguinis 
and S. gordonii. An addition rat caries model showed that the loss of
S-glutathionylation attenuated the cariogenicity of S. mutans. Taken together,
our study provides an insight into the S-glutathionylation of bacterial proteins 
and the regulation of oxidative stress resistance and interspecies competition.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1008774 
PMCID: PMC7410335
PMID: 32716974  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

