
1. Indian J Dent Res. 2020 May-Jun;31(3):420-425. doi: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_39_19.

Comparison of oral micro-flora in caries active and caries free Indian children
using culture techniques and PCR analysis.

Bansal K(1), Chaudhary R(2), Mathur VP(1), Tewari N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry, Centre for Dental
Education and Research, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Centre for Dental Education and Research, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Background and Aims: Although Streptococcus mutans has been implicated as the
major etiologic agent in the development of dental caries, however, this organism
has not been found to be present in all children with caries. Thus it remains to 
be elucidated whether a single or specific consortium of bacteria is responsible 
for the caries process. The aim of this study is to evaluate the oral microflora 
of Indian children suffering from dental caries and to compare the same in
children with no caries.
Methods: The study was carried out on 67 out-patient 2-14 years old children who 
reported to the department of Paediatric Dentistry. Dental plaque samples from
superficial and deep carious lesions and caries free surfaces in caries active
children (n = 35) were collected using a sterile excavator in storage vials and
subjected to various conventional and molecular microbial techniques. Caries free
children (n = 32), who did not have any carious lesion served as controls. The
data obtained was subjected to Pearson's Chi Square/Fischer's Exact tests to
determine the statistical difference between the microflora of groups.
Results: Main organisms isolated were: Streptococcal species mainly S anginosus, 
S salivarius, S gordonii: Lactobacilli spp; Coagulase negative Staphylococci,
Staph epidermidis, Staph aureus. Other organisms such as Klebsiella spp,
Acinetobacter, Enterococcus, E coli could also be found. There was a statistical 
difference in the frequency of isolation of non-mutans Streptococcal species (P =
0.008) and Lactobacilli species (P = 0.0001) in the two groups.
Conclusions: The study suggests that caries activity in this population of
children is associated with a diverse microbial flora without detectable S
mutans. Main organisms associated with dental caries in this population are:
Gram-positive cocci and bacilli mainly the non-mutans Streptococcus and
Lactobacilli. Frequent consumption of sugar containing food promotes the presence
and growth of cariogenic organisms.

DOI: 10.4103/ijdr.IJDR_39_19 
PMID: 32769277  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None

