
1. Am J Dent. 2020 Aug;33(4):201-205.

Effect of biofilm exposure on marginal integrity of composite restorations.

Mushashe AM(1), de Almeida SA(2), Ferracane JL(3), Merritt J(3), Correr GM(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Sciences, University Positivo, Curitiba, PR, Brazil,
stefano.ardu@unige.ch.
(2)Graduate Program in Dentistry, Federal Fluminense University, Niterói, RJ,
Brazil.
(3)Department of Restorative Dentistry, School of Dentistry, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, OR, USA.
(4)School of Health Sciences, University Positivo, Curitiba, PR, Brazil,
gmcnolasco@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the effect of bacterial exposure on the marginal integrity
of dentin-resin interfaces for composites with and without bioactive glass (BAG).
METHODS: Cavity preparations of 5 mm width and 1.5 mm depth were machined into
dentin disks by means of a computer controlled milling system. After applying the
bonding agent, cavity preparations (n=3-5) were restored by incremental technique
with experimental resin composites (50:50 BisGMA/TEGDMA: 72wt% filler) with
different filler compositions: control - 67 wt% silanated strontium glass and
5wt% aerosol-silica filler and BAG - 57 wt% silanated strontium glass and 15 wt% 
BAG-65 wt% silica. Samples were then stored in sterile Todd-Hewitt media or
co-incubated with Streptococcus mutans (UA 159), at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 1-2 weeks.
For samples co-incubated with a living biofilm, a luciferase assay was performed 
in order to assess its viability. Surfaces were impressed before and after each
storage condition and replicas examined in a scanning electron microscope. Using 
image analysis software (Image J), the discontinuous margins percentage (%DM) was
quantitatively assessed. Data were analyzed using two-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey's test (α= 0.05).
RESULTS: Gap size ranged between 7-23 µm. The bacterial exposure significantly
increased the %DM in both groups predominantly due to the formation of new gap
regions. There was no difference between control and BAG composites regarding %DM
and the biofilm viability. Bacterial exposure promoted degradation of composite
restoration marginal integrity, with no difference between composites with and
without BAG.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: The samples incubated with living biofilm had a higher gap
percentage in the margins, confirming the negative effect of cariogenic bacteria 
on margin degradation. The parameters defined for such synergy can help to
understand the multi-factorial aspect of marginal discontinuity and therefore,
predict the behavior of composite restorations subjected to the challenging oral 
environment.

Copyright©American Journal of Dentistry.


PMID: 32794395  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no conflict of interest.
This work was supported by the Brazilian Federal Agency for Support and
Evaluation of Graduate Education - CAPES and funded with public resources
obtained through the "Public Call 15/2017" - Fundação Araucária/Secretaria de
Estado da Ciência, Tecnologia e Ensino Superior do Paraná (SETI), grant
#15.561.047-6.

