
1. Arch Oral Biol. 2020 Sep;117:104842. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104842. Epub
2020 Jul 16.

Antimicrobial potential of irrigants based on essential oils of Cymbopogon
martinii and Thymus zygis towards in vitro multispecies biofilm cultured in ex
vivo root canals.

Marinković J(1), Ćulafić DM(2), Nikolić B(3), Đukanović S(4), Marković T(5),
Tasić G(6), Ćirić A(7), Marković D(8).

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade - Vinča Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National
Institute of Republic of Serbia, Mike Petrovića Alasa 12, Belgrade, Serbia.
Electronic address: jelena.marinkovic@vin.bg.ac.rs.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Biology,
Studentski trg 16, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: mdragana@bio.bg.ac.rs.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Biology,
Studentski trg 16, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: biljanan@bio.bg.ac.rs.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Belgrade - Faculty of Biology,
Studentski trg 16, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: stefana.d@bio.bg.sc.rs.
(5)Institute for Medicinal Plant Research "Dr Josif Pančić", Tadeuša Košćuška 1, 
Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: tmarkovic@mocbilja.rs.
(6)University of Belgrade - Vinča Institute of Nuclear Sciences - National
Institute of Republic of Serbia, Mike Petrovića Alasa 12, Belgrade, Serbia.
Electronic address: gvozdentasic@vinca.rs.
(7)University of Belgrade - Institute for Biological Research "Siniša Stanković" 
- National Institute of Republic of Serbia, Bulevar Despota Stefana 142,
Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: rancic@ibiss.bg.ac.rs.
(8)Department of Pediatric and Preventive Dentistry, University of Belgrade -
Faculty of Dental Medicine, Dr Subotića 11, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address:
dejan.markovic@stomf.bg.ac.rs.

OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine the antibiofilm efficacy of Cymbopogon 
martinii and Thymus zygis essential oils and to estimate the disruption potential
of oil-based endodontic irrigants on the multispecies biofilm formed in the root 
canals of extracted teeth.
DESIGN: The essential oils were characterized (GC-MS), while their antibacterial 
and cytotoxic properties were detected by microdilution and MTT assays. Particles
sizes and polydispersity indices were determined for the irrigants. The isolates 
from root canals of pediatric patients were identified (MALDI-TOF). The
multispecies biofilms were formed from Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus
sanguinis and Enterococcus faecalis. Antibiofilm properties of the essential oils
and irrigants were determined by crystal violet and plate counting assay.
Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA.
RESULTS: The screening of biofilm biomass revealed a disruption potential of C.
martinii essential oil. The plate counting assay showed the efficacy of both oils
in diminishing cell viability: high in biofilms (reduction of log10CFU was
2.75-2.87) and moderate in the planktons formed above. The essential oil-based
irrigants showed the same antibiofilm activity as in the control (1.5 % sodium
hypochlorite) for C. martini and almost 2-fold higher for T. zygis. Successive
irrigations with 1.5 % sodium hypochlorite, saline and an oil-based irrigant was 
more efficient for C. martini than for the control (reductions of log10CFU was
1.69 and 1.14, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Notable activities achieved by essential oils and oil-based
irrigants, particularly regarding C. martini, against the biofilm consisting of
S. mitis, S. sanguinis, and E. faecalis, are expected to encourage further
research in endodontics.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2020.104842 
PMID: 32707220 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.

