
1. Res Vet Sci. 2020 Oct;132:33-41. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2020.05.016. Epub 2020 May
20.

Relative expression of genes associated with adhesion to bovine mammary
epithelial cells by Streptococcus uberis.

Fessia AS(1), Dieser SA(2), Renna MS(3), Raspanti CG(2), Odierno LM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiología e Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Físico-Quimicas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto, Ruta Nacional
36, Km 601, X5804ZAB Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina. Electronic address: 
afessia@exa.unrc.edu.ar.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología e Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Físico-Quimicas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto, Ruta Nacional
36, Km 601, X5804ZAB Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentina.
(3)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET),
Argentina; Instituto de Ciencias Veterinarias del Litoral, Universidad Nacional
del Litoral, Argentina.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología e Inmunología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas,
Físico-Quimicas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Río Cuarto, Ruta Nacional
36, Km 601, X5804ZAB Río Cuarto, Córdoba, Argentina. Electronic address:
lodierno@exa.unrc.edu.ar.

Streptococcus uberis is one of the most prevalent environmental pathogens of
bovine mastitis. Biofilm growth ability by S. uberis looks to depend first upon
the adherence of cells to a surface. The S. uberis ability to adhere to mammary
gland epithelia might provide an advantage to colonize the lactating mammary
gland. The objectives of this study were (a) to select S.uberis strains according
to their ability to form biofilm, (b) to determine adherence to and
internalization into MAC-T cells and (c) to investigate the expression profile
adherence genes in these S. uberis strains. For the assays, the MAC-T bovine
mammary epithelial cell line was used. Relative expression of genes acdA, lmb,
scpA, sua, fbp and lbp was quantified by RT-qPCR. We observed that the RC38
strain from clinical bovine mastitis showed in the six genes higher values than
control in both conditions. While the strain with greater ability to adhere, from
clinical mastitis and biofilm producer (RC29) evidenced higher values in group 1 
(G1) (bacteria after the initial contact with MAC-T cells) and decrease in group 
2 (G2) (both adhered and internalized bacteria) than control. Strains with a
moderate or strong capacity for biofilm production showed significantly lower
relative expression values in the G2. In all adherence associated genes, strain
RC19 showed relative expression values incremented in G1, while in G2 decreased
expression. In conclusion, we did not find a single profile of relative
expression because the relative expression levels of each gene differed depending
on the strain and the co-culture stage of S. uberis cells from which RNA was
obtained.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2020.05.016 
PMID: 32474263 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None of the
authors of this paper has any financial or personal relationship with other
people or organizations that could inappropriately influence or bias the content 
of the paper.

