
1. Microbiologyopen. 2019 Dec;8(12):e940. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.940. Epub 2019 Oct 6.

Screening of antagonistic strains of respiratory origin and analysis of their
bacteriostatic effects on pathogens.

Li X(1), Yang B(1), Sun Y(1), Li S(1), Liu D(1), Zou Y(1), Xiao C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Environmental Pollution and Microecology of Liaoning Province,
Shenyang Medical College, Shenyang, China.

OBJECTIVE: To find antagonistic strains in the respiratory tract having
bacteriostatic properties against common pathogens.
METHODS: The oropharyngeal microbiota of five healthy children aged 4-6 years
were collected and α-hemolytic bacteria screened on 15% sheep blood agar.
Bacteriostatic effects of the isolated α-hemolytic bacteria on Staphylococcus
aureus, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus pyogenes were
evaluated by the Oxford cup method. Antagonistic strains were identified by mass 
spectrometry, and the16S rDNAs were sequenced, and their best bacteriostatic
concentrations and antagonistic spectra for Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
vulgaris, Enterobacter cloacae, Acinetobacter Baumanii, Staphylococcus aureus,
Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus pyogenes were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Of 300 isolated α-hemolytic bacterial clones, four exhibited
bacteriostatic activity against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Streptococcus pyogenes. Mass spectrometric analyses
revealed that two of them were Streptococcus mitis and two others were
Streptococcus parasanguinis strains. Further tests showed that all 4 antagonistic
strains also had bacteriostatic effects on Klebsiella pneumoniae, Proteus
vulgaris, Enterobacter cloacae, and Acinetobacter Baumanii, and the mode of
action was not mediated by lactic acid production.
CONCLUSION: Four antagonistic Streptococcus strains derived from oropharyngeal
microbiotas showed bacteriostatic effects on pathogens and may be involved in
pharyngeal microbiome homeostasis.

© 2019 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.940 
PMCID: PMC6925161
PMID: 31588663  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

