
1. J Infect Chemother. 2020 Sep 28. pii: S1341-321X(20)30334-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jiac.2020.09.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular epidemiological characterization in mucoid-type Streptococcus
pneumoniae isolates obtained from invasive pneumococcal disease patients in
Japan.

Ubukata K(1), Wajima T(2), Takata M(1), Murayama SY(3), Morozumi M(1), Mukae
H(4), Ishida T(5), Miyairi I(6), Kiyota H(7), Iwata S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy
and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Graduate School of Pharmacy, Nihon
University, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagasaki University Hospital, Nagasaki,
Japan.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ohara Healthcare Foundation, Kurashiki
Central Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medical Subspecialties,
National Center for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Department of Urology, The Jikei University Katsushika Medical Center, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Infectious Diseases, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan; Departments of Infectious Diseases, National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: siwata@a8.keio.jp.

INTRODUCTION: Streptococcus pneumoniae with a mucoid-type capsule is associated
with invasive pneumococcal diseases (IPDs). Despite the introduction of
pneumococcal vaccines, IPDs caused by mucoid-type isolates are still prevalent.
The present study aimed to characterize mucoid-type S. pneumoniae isolated from
IPD patients throughout Japan in 2017 (post-vaccination era).
METHODS: A total of 225 mucoid-type isolates were collected. The serotype,
antimicrobial susceptibility, and multilocus sequence type of these isolates were
determined.
RESULTS: The prevalence of IPDs caused by mucoid-type isolates was high in
adults, especially in the elderly (≥65 years of age), and prognosis in these
patients was significantly poor. Of the mucoid-type isolates, the predominant
serotype was serotype 3 (84.4%), and the remaining were serotypes 37 (15.1%) and 
8 (0.4%). Antimicrobial susceptibility showed that most mucoid isolates exhibited
the penicillin-intermediate resistant S. pneumoniae genotype (gPISP). However,
the serotype 3 isolate exhibited the penicillin-resistant S. pneumoniae genotype 
(gPRSP). This gPRSP isolate was classified into ST166, which is related to
serotypes 9 V and 11 strains. Sequence analysis of the capsule-coding regions and
its flanking regions indicated that recombination occurred upstream and
downstream of the capsule-coding region, suggesting that gPRSP (serotype
9 V/ST166) obtaining the type-3 capsule gene cluster resulted in the emergence of
gPRSP (serotype 3/ST166).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicated that IPDs caused by mucoid-type S. pneumoniae
are still a serious concern and mucoid-type S. pneumoniae with novel phenotype
could emerge via capsular switching in response to environmental changes such as 
introduction of vaccines and improper use of antimicrobial agents.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2020.09.014 
PMID: 33004265 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest S. Iwata has
received grant support from Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd., Pfizer Japan
Inc., Taisho Toyama Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Astellas 
Pharma Inc., and MSD K. K. H. Mukae has received grant support from MSD K. K.,
Astellas Pharma Inc., TAIHO Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Chugai Pharmaceutical
Co.,Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Eli Lilly Japan K.K., FUJIFILM Pharma Co.,
Ltd., Sumitomo Dainippon Pharma Co., Ltd., Taisho Toyama Pharmaceutical Co.,
Ltd., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Toyama Chemical Co.,Ltd., Meiji Seika
Pharma Co., Ltd., Novartis Phama Co.,Ltd., Nippon Boehringer Ingelheim Co., Ltd.,
and Pfizer Japan Inc. T. Ishida has received payment for lectures from MSD K. K. 
H. Kiyota has received grant support from Taisho Toyama Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.,
Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Astellas Pharma Inc., Toyama Chemical Co.,Ltd. and
Sanofi K.K. K. Ubukata has received payment for lectures from Meiji Seika Pharma 
Co., Ltd. and Pfizer Japan Inc. The other authors declare that they have no
conflict of interest.

