
1. J Infect Public Health. 2020 Sep 8. pii: S1876-0341(20)30598-0. doi:
10.1016/j.jiph.2020.07.017. [Epub ahead of print]

Streptococcus anginosus group infections: Management and outcome at a tertiary
care hospital.

Al Majid F(1), Aldrees A(2), Barry M(3), Binkhamis K(4), Allam A(5), Almohaya
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, King Saud University,
King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
almajid@ksu.edu.sa.
(2)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, King Saud University,
King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
a_m_al_drees@hotmail.com.
(3)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, King Saud University,
King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
mbarry@ksu.edu.sa.
(4)Microbiology Unit, Department of Pathology, King Saud University, King Khalid 
University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
kbinkhamis@ksu.edu.sa.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine & Critical Care, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
University Hospital, Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. Electronic address: aaallam@kaauh.edu.sa.
(6)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, King Saud University,
King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address:
almohayaam@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Data on patients with invasive Streptococcus anginosus group (SAG)
infections is limited, as it's been considered commensal bacteria in the human
microbiota. We conducted an analysis of SAG infections to assist clinicians in
understanding their burden and clinical outcomes.
METHODS: A retrospective study of medical records, identifying invasive SAG
bacteria of sterile-site isolates that were managed from May 2015 to April 2017, 
at a tertiary care hospital in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Demographic data, clinical
presentation, site of infection, antibiotic use, and outcome were recorded and
analyzed to identify factors associated with poor outcome and/or polymicrobial
growth.
RESULTS: We identified 105 cases of SAG infections in adults, with 52% of the
patients being male and the mean age of 52.4 years with comorbidities occurring
in more than half of the cases such as diabetes (38%) and malignancy (15%).
Overall mortality was 6%, and it was statistically associated with age older than
65 years, polymicrobial growth and a history of malignancy. The infection
frequencies were skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI; 55%), intra-abdominal
infections (24%), bacteremia (14%), genitourinary infections (8.5%), and
pleuropulmonary infections (5%). Abscesses accounted for 68% of cases.
Polymicrobial infection (46%) with Enterobacteriaceae and Gram-negative anaerobes
coincided with SAG infection. Polymicrobial growth was significantly associated
with abscess formation, intra-abdominal source of infections, and poor outcome.
In addition, death in patients with SAG was statistically associated with
patients older than 65 years of age and those with history of cancer or
transplant.
CONCLUSION: SSTIs and intra-abdominal infections are the most common clinical
presentations in our cohort. Bacteremia was uncommon; however, the prognosis is
less favorable. Overall susceptibility to penicillin was 91%, therefore β-lactam 
antibiotics are the drug of choice and additional coverage for anaerobic and
gram-negative bacteria should be considered for intra-abdominal collection and
solid or organ abscesses.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiph.2020.07.017 
PMID: 32917555 

