
1. PLoS One. 2020 Feb 28;15(2):e0229485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229485.
eCollection 2020.

Development of Oral Care Chip, a novel device for quantitative detection of the
oral microbiota associated with periodontal disease.

Nozawa A(1), Oshima H(1), Togawa N(1), Nozaki T(2), Murakami S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tsurumi R&D center, Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation, Yokohama, Kanagawa,
Japan.
(2)Division of Interdisciplinary Dentistry, Osaka University Dental Hospital,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(3)Department of Periodontology, Osaka University Graduate School of Dentistry,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Periodontal disease, the most prevalent infectious disease in the world, is
caused by biofilms formed in periodontal pockets. No specific bacterial species
that can cause periodontitis alone has been found in any study to date. Several
periodontopathic bacteria are associated with the progress of periodontal
disease. Consequently, it is hypothesized that dysbiosis of subgingival
microbiota may be a cause of periodontal disease. This study aimed to investigate
the relationship between the subgingival microbiota and the clinical status of
periodontal pockets in a quantitative and clinically applicable way with the
newly developed Oral Care Chip. The Oral Care Chip is a DNA microarray tool with 
improved quantitative performance, that can be used in combination with
competitive PCR to quantitatively detect 17 species of subgingival bacteria.
Cluster analysis based on the similarity of each bacterial quantity was performed
on 204 subgingival plaque samples collected from periodontitis patients and
healthy volunteers. A significant difference in the number of total bacteria,
Treponema denticola, Campylobacter rectus, Fusobacterium nucleatum, and
Streptococcus intermedia bacteria in any combination of the three clusters
indicated that these bacteria gradually increased in number from the stage before
the pocket depth deepened. Conversely, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Tannerella
forsythia, Prevotella intermedia, and Streptococcus constellatus, which had
significant differences only in limited clusters, were thought to increase in
number as the pocket depth deepened, after periodontal pocket formation.
Furthermore, in clusters where healthy or mild periodontal disease sites were
classified, there was no statistically significant difference in pocket depth,
but the number of bacteria gradually increased from the stage before the pocket
depth increased. This means that quantitative changes in these bacteria can be a 
predictor of the progress of periodontal tissue destruction, and this novel
microbiological test using the Oral Care Chip could be effective at detecting
dysbiosis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0229485 
PMCID: PMC7048280
PMID: 32109938  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A research grant was provided by Mitsubishi
Chemical Corporation based on the joint research agreement between Mitsubishi
Chemical Corporation and Osaka University. Authors AN, HO & NT are affiliated to 
the funders. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing
data and materials.

