
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Aug 21. pii: AEM.01262-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01262-20. [Epub ahead of print]

Competition and Caries on Enamel of a Dual-species Biofilm Model of Streptococcus
mutans and Streptococcus sanguinis.

Díaz-Garrido N(1), Lozano CP(2), Kreth J(3), Giacaman RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cariology Unit, Department of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Talca, Talca, Chile.
(2)Oral Biology and Biochemistry Laboratory, Institute for Research in Dental
Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Restorative Dentistry, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, OR, USA.
(4)Cariology Unit, Department of Oral Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Talca, Talca, Chile. giacaman@utalca.cl.

Imbalances within the dental biofilm trigger dental caries, currently considered 
a dysbiosis and the most prevalent non-communicable disease. There is still a gap
in knowledge about the dynamics of enamel colonization by bacteria from the
dental biofilm in caries. The aim, therefore, was to test whether the sequence of
enamel colonization by a typically commensal and a cariogenic species modifies
biofilm's cariogenicity. Dual-species biofilms of Streptococcus mutans (Sm) and
Streptococcus sanguinis (Ss) on saliva-coated enamel slabs were inoculated in
different sequences: Sm followed by Ss (Sm-Ss), Ss followed by Sm (Ss-Sm), Sm and
Ss inoculated at the same time (Sm=Ss) and the single-species controls Sm
followed by Sm (Sm-Sm) and Ss followed by Ss (Ss-Ss). Biofilms were exposed to
10% sucrose, 3x/day for 5 days and the slabs/biofilms were retrieved to assess
demineralization, viable cells, biomass, proteins, polysaccharides and H2O2
production. When compared with Sm-Sm, primary inoculation with Ss reduced
demineralization (p<0.05). Both Ss-Sm and Sm=Ss sequences showed reduction in
biomass, protein and polysaccharide content (p<0.05). The highest S. sanguinis
viable cells and H2O2 production and the lowest acidogenicity were observed when 
Ss colonized enamel before Sm (p<0.05). Initial enamel adherence with commensal
biofilms seems to induce more intense competition against more typically
cariogenic species, reducing cariogenicity.Importance The concept of caries as an
ecological disease implies the understanding of the intricate relationships among
the populating microorganisms. Under frequent sugars exposure, some bacteria from
the dental biofilm develop pathogenic traits that lead to imbalances (dysbiosis).
Depending on which microorganism colonizes the dental surface first, different
competition strategies may be developed. Studying the interactions in the entire 
dental biofilm is not an easy task. In this article, therefore, we modeled the
interplay among these microorganisms using a caries-inducing (S. mutans) and a
health-associated species (S. sanguinis). Initial enamel adherence with S.
sanguinis seems to induce more intense competition against typically
caries-inducing species. Besides continuous exposure with sugars, early
colonization of the enamel by highly cariogenic species, like S. mutans, appears 
to be needed to develop caries lesions, as well. Promoting early colonization by 
health-associated bacteria, such as S. sanguinis, could help to maintain oral
health, delaying dysbiosis.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01262-20 
PMID: 32826216 

