
1. GE Port J Gastroenterol. 2020 Jul;27(4):283-289. doi: 10.1159/000504760. Epub
2019 Dec 20.

Whipple's Disease: A Rare Cause of Malabsorption Syndrome.

Cardoso J(1), Gomes L(2), Santos S(1), Moreira H(3), Gomes P(4), Rua J(1),
Fortuna J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Coimbra University and Hospital Centre,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Department of Pneumology, Coimbra University and Hospital Centre, Coimbra,
Portugal.
(3)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Coimbra University and Hospital Centre,
Coimbra, Portugal.
(4)Department of Imagiology, Coimbra University and Hospital Centre, Coimbra,
Portugal.

Introduction: Whipple's disease is a rare, chronic, systemic disease caused by
the actinomycete Tropheryma whipplei. Clinical manifestations vary widely
depending on the affected system, the most common being the digestive tract.
Case Presentation: The authors report the case of a 52-year-old man with
malabsorption syndrome, diarrhea, marked weight loss, melanoderma, and visual and
proprioception disorders. Periodic acid-Schiff staining of a proximal small bowel
biopsy and peripheral-blood PCR identification of T. whipplei confirmed the
disease. The patient was initially treated with intravenous ceftriaxone, followed
by oral trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole with significant clinical improvement.
Conclusions: This case is reported due to its rarity and the diagnostic challenge
it presents. Although uncommon, Whipple's disease should be considered as a
differential diagnosis of malabsorption syndrome due to its systemic impact and
possible treatment with targeted antibiotic therapy.

Publisher: A doença de Whipple é uma doença rara, crónica, sistémica, causada
pelo actinomicete Tropheryma whipplei. As manifestações clínicas variam de acordo
com o órgão envolvido, sendo a sua apresentação típica predominantemente
associada ao sistema digestivo.Os autores descrevem um caso de um homem de 52
anos com síndrome de má absorção, diarreia, perda de peso marcada, melanodermia, 
bem como alterações visuais e a nível da propriocepção. A coloração com PAS na
biopsia de intestino delgado proximal e a identificação por PCR no sangue
periférico confirmou a doença. Iniciou antibioterapia com ceftriaxone EV, seguida
de trimetropim/sulfametoxazol oral com recuperação clínica significativa.Este
caso é descrito pela sua raridade e pelo desafio diagnóstico. Apesar de incomum
deve ser considerada como diagnóstico diferencial do síndrome de má absorção
atendendo ao seu impacto sistémico e ao possível tratamento com antibioterapia
dirigida.
Copyright © 2019 by Sociedade Portuguesa de Gastrenterologia Published by S.
Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000504760 
PMCID: PMC7383288
PMID: 32775551 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to
declare.

