
1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2020 Jun 23;20(1):197. doi: 10.1186/s12876-020-01302-2.

Whipple disease diagnosed by enteroscopy: first case report in Colombia of an
underdiagnosed disease and literature review.

Rey R M(1), Orozco LA(2), Marrugo K(3), López R(4), Pérez-Riveros ED(5), De la
Hoz-Valle J(5), Sierra-Arango F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Digestive Endoscopy Section,
Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Cogotá D.C., Colombia. margaritarey1@hotmail.com.
(2)Global Medical Center, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(3)Universidad del Rosario, Bogotá D.C., Colombia.
(4)Pathology Department, Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá, Cogotá D.C., Colombia.
(5)Subdirección de Estudios Clínicos y Epidemiología Clínica (SECEC), Fundación
Santa Fe de Bogotá, Bogotá D. C., Colombia.
(6)Gastroenterology and Hepatology Department, Digestive Endoscopy Section,
Fundación Santa Fe de Bogotá and Universidad de los Andes Medical School, Bogotá 
D.C., Colombia.

BACKGROUND: Whipple's disease is a rare systemic disease caused by a
gram-positive bacillus called Tropheryma whipplei. First described in 1907 as an 
intestinal lipodystrophy with histological finding of vacuoles in the macrophages
of the intestinal mucous. Usually the symptoms are localized according to the
compromised organ. The differential diagnosis is wide. It can be fatal without
proper treatment. Recurrence can occur in up to 33% of the cases and usually
compromises the neurological system.
CASE PRESENTATION: This article reports the case of a 46-year-old female patient 
with a history of a 6-month hypochromic microcytic anemia of unknown cause. She
consulted for a 6-months oppressive abdominal pain located in the mesogastrium as
well as abdominal distention associated with nausea and liquid stools; in
addition, she had an 8-month small and medium joint pain, without edema or
erythema. Physical examination without relevant findings. Multiple
esophagogastroduodenoscopies with normal gastric and duodenal biopsies findings
and a normal colonoscopy were performed. Endoscope capsule showed red spots in
the duodenum and ulcerations in the jejunum and proximal ileum covered by fibrin;
histological report showed macrophages with positive periodic acid-schiff
reaction staining (PAS staining), disgnosing Whipple's disease. Antibiotics were 
initiated. The patient is currently in the second phase of treatment without
gastrointestinal and joint symptoms.
CONCLUSION: This is the first case reported in Colombia. It is a rare entity and 
difficult to diagnose reason why it is important to continue with clinical
investigations to give more clarity about the onset and appropriate diagnose to
avoid the delay in treatment of this entity.

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-020-01302-2 
PMCID: PMC7310292
PMID: 32576148 

