
1. Microbiologyopen. 2020 Feb;9(2):e958. doi: 10.1002/mbo3.958. Epub 2019 Nov 14.

Combining culture and culture-independent methods reveals new microbial
composition of halitosis patients' tongue biofilm.

Bernardi S(1), Karygianni L(2), Filippi A(3), Anderson AC(4), Zürcher A(3),
Hellwig E(4), Vach K(5), Macchiarelli G(1), Al-Ahmad A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of L'Aquila,
L'Aquila, Italy.
(2)Clinic for Preventive Dentistry, Periodontology and Cariology, University of
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Oral Surgery, Center of Dental Traumatology, University Center
for Dental Medicine Basel UZB, Basel, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, Center for Dental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(5)Institute for Medical Biometry and Statistics, University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Oral malodor is a very discomforting condition deriving from the
presence of volatile sulfur compounds in the expired air. In halitosis of
intraoral etiology, the volatile sulfur compounds are metabolic products of the
oral microorganisms within the biofilm coating the tongue dorsum as well as other
tissues in the oral cavity. The aim of this study was to characterize and compare
the microbial composition of tongue biofilm in volunteers suffering from
halitosis and healthy volunteers by means of both the culture method and
culture-independent cloning technique.
RESULTS: A high bacterial variety (more than 80 different species) was detected
using the combination of both methods. A distinct bacterial composition was
revealed in the halitosis-associated biofilms compared with the health-associated
biofilms. Actinomyces graevenitzii was shown to be significantly associated with 
the halitosis condition. The culture method identified 47 species, included
Veillonella rogosae, never isolated from the tongue biofilm of halitosis patients
so far. In the healthy condition, the culture-dependent method showed that the
most frequent species were Streptococcus parasanguinis among the aerobes and
Veillonella spp. among the anaerobes. The culture-independent cloning method
detected more than 50 species. Streptococci, in particular S. mitis/oralis,
S. pseudopneumoniae, and S. infantis as well as Prevotella spp., were found most 
frequently in halitosis patients. Streptococcus salivarius and Rothia
mucilaginosa were found more frequently in the healthy condition.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of the culture-dependent and culture-independent
cloning techniques allowed for a widespread analysis of the tongue biofilm in
halitosis patients. The results can support further pharmacological research for 
new antimicrobial agents and halitosis therapy strategies.

© 2019 The Authors. MicrobiologyOpen published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/mbo3.958 
PMCID: PMC7002105
PMID: 31725203 

