
1. Cell Host Microbe. 2020 Aug 12;28(2):285-297.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.06.009.
Epub 2020 Jul 10.

Breastmilk Feeding Practices Are Associated with the Co-Occurrence of Bacteria in
Mothers' Milk and the Infant Gut: the CHILD Cohort Study.

Fehr K(1), Moossavi S(2), Sbihi H(3), Boutin RCT(4), Bode L(5), Robertson B(5),
Yonemitsu C(5), Field CJ(6), Becker AB(7), Mandhane PJ(8), Sears MR(9), Khafipour
E(10), Moraes TJ(11), Subbarao P(12), Finlay BB(13), Turvey SE(14), Azad MB(15).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba and Developmental Origins
of Chronic Diseases in Children Network (DEVOTION), Winnipeg, MB, Canada;
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, 
Canada.
(2)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba and Developmental Origins
of Chronic Diseases in Children Network (DEVOTION), Winnipeg, MB, Canada;
Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; Digestive Disease Research Institute, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Larsson-Rosenquist Foundation Mother-Milk-Infant 
Center of Research Excellence (MOMI CORE), University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(7)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba and Developmental Origins
of Chronic Diseases in Children Network (DEVOTION), Winnipeg, MB, Canada;
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, 
Canada; Digestive Disease Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(9)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Animal Science, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(11)Department of Pediatrics Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada.
(12)Department of Pediatrics Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada; Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic
address: bfinlay@msl.ubc.ca.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic address: sturvey@bcchr.ca.
(15)Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba and Developmental Origins 
of Chronic Diseases in Children Network (DEVOTION), Winnipeg, MB, Canada;
Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, 
Canada. Electronic address: meghan.azad@umanitoba.ca.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2020 Aug 12;28(2):151-153.

Gut microbiota play a critical role in infant health. It is now accepted that
breastmilk contains live bacteria from endogenous and exogenous sources, but it
remains unclear whether these bacteria transfer to the infant gut and whether
this process is influenced by breastmilk feeding practices. Here, we show that
certain bacteria, including Streptococcus spp. and Veillonella dispar, co-occur
in mothers' milk and their infants' stool, and co-occurrence is reduced when
infants receive pumped breastmilk. The relative abundances of commonly shared
species are positively correlated between breastmilk and stool. Overall, gut
microbiota composition is strongly associated with breastfeeding exclusivity and 
duration but not breastmilk feeding mode (nursing versus pumping). Moreover,
breastmilk bacteria contributed to overall gut microbiota variation to a similar 
extent as other modifiers of the infant microbiome, such as birth mode. These
results provide evidence that breastmilk may transfer bacteria to the infant gut 
and influence microbiota development.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2020.06.009 
PMID: 32652062 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests M.B.A. receives research
funding from CIHR, Research Manitoba, the Canada Foundation for Innovation, the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Manitoba Children’s Hospital Foundation,
Prolacta Biosciences, and the Garfield G. Weston Foundation. M.B.A. serves as
Secretary to the International Society for Research on Human Milk and Lactation. 
M.B.A. regularly speaks at conferences and workshops on infant nutrition, some
supported by Medela and Prolacta Biosciences; she has contributed without
remuneration to online courses on breastmilk and the infant microbiome. L.B.
receives research funding from the United States National Institutes of Health
and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. L.B. is the UC San Diego Chair of
Collaborative Human Milk Research, endowed by the Family Larsson-Rosenquist
Foundation. L.B. is a (co-)inventor on patent applications regarding the use of
HMOs in the prevention of necrotizing enterocolitis in preterm infants and other 
chronic inflammatory diseases throughout the entire lifespan. L.B. frequently
speaks at national and international conferences and other events, some supported
by Nestle Nutrition Institute, Abbott Nutrition International, Prolacta
Biosciences, or Medela AG. L.B. currently serves on the Scientific Advisory Board
for the Family Larsson-Rosenquist Foundation, as immediate past president of the 
International Society for Research in Human Milk and Lactation. C.J.F. receives
research funding from the Canadian Institute for Health Sciences, the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Canada Research Chair’s
Program and Dairy Farmers of Canada. She is the Past President of the American
Society for Nutrition and serves on the Lipids Committee of the International
Institute for Life Sciences North America and the Expert Science Advisory
Committee for Dairy Farmers of Canada. She is Associate Editor for Advances in
Nutrition. These entities had no role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data; preparation,
review, or approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit the manuscript for
publication. The remaining authors declare no potential conflicts of interest.

