
1. Microb Pathog. 2020 Mar;140:103962. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.103962. Epub 2020
Jan 2.

Orally administered pathobionts and commensals have comparable and innocuous
systemic effects on germ-free mice.

Yamazaki K(1), Sato K(1), Tsuzuno T(1), Sulijaya B(2), Mashima I(3), Kawamura
Y(4), Yamazaki K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Oral-Systemic Connection, Division of Oral Science for
Health Promotion, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Division of Periodontology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.
(2)Research Unit for Oral-Systemic Connection, Division of Oral Science for
Health Promotion, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Division of Periodontology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan; Department of
Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.
(3)Department of Oral Medical Science, School of Dentistry, Ohu University,
Koriyama, Japan; Department of Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin
University, Nagoya, Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, School of Pharmacy, Aichi-Gakuin University,
Nagoya, Japan.
(5)Research Unit for Oral-Systemic Connection, Division of Oral Science for
Health Promotion, Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Niigata, Japan. Electronic address: kaz@dent.niigata-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Recent evidence suggests that oral bacteria can affect
extra-oral diseases by modulating aspects of the gut environment such as the
microbiome, metabolome, and immune profiles. However, differences in the effects 
of different types of oral bacteria, particularly periodontopathic and
health-associated bacteria, remain elusive.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Five-week-old germ-free mice were orally administered with
either periodontopathic bacteria as oral pathobionts (Porphyromonas gingivalis,
Filifactor alocis, and Fusobacterium nucleatum) or bacteria associated with
periodontal health (Actinomyces naeslundii, Streptococcus mitis, and Veillonella 
rogosae) twice a week for five weeks. The presence of all bacterial species in
the feces and the livers of the mice was analyzed via polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), using specific primers for 16S rRNA genes. Alveolar bone resorption was
evaluated histologically. The expression profiles of various genes in the liver
and small intestine were analyzed using real-time PCR. Sera were analyzed to
determine the levels of antibodies and endotoxin. The proportions of T helper 17 
(Th17) and regulatory T (Treg) cells in mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer's
patches were analyzed using flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Neither of the types of bacteria administered in this experiment induced
alveolar bone resorption. All bacteria elicited some degree of systemic antibody 
response in the mice, although the response to S. mitis was not obvious. The
response to P. gingivalis and V. rogosae was strongest. Generally, the
health-associated bacteria but not the periodontitis-associated bacteria were
detected in fecal samples. Interestingly, only Fusobacterium nucleatum DNA was
detected in the liver, despite that live Fusobacterium nucleatum were not
detected in the liver. The levels of interleukin-17 in the intestine and genes
related to lipid accumulation in the liver were significantly higher in the mice 
that received periodontitis-associated bacteria. In addition, expression of the
gene associated with endoplasmic reticulum stress was higher and that of the gene
controlling circadian rhythm was lower in the periodontitis group. There was no
difference in serum endotoxin, T-cell phenotypes in the lymphatic tissues, or
genes related to the gut barrier.
CONCLUSION: Oral administration of periodontitis-associated bacteria can induce
pathological changes in the liver and intestine that are implicated in the
process of periodontitis. These findings further support the importance of the
oral-gut connection.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2020.103962 
PMID: 31904448 

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no conflicts of interest.

