
1. Microorganisms. 2020 May 6;8(5). pii: E674. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8050674.

Endodontic-Like Oral Biofilms as Models for Multispecies Interactions in
Endodontic Diseases.

Lukic D(1), Karygianni L(1), Flury M(1), Attin T(1), Thurnheer T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Conservative and Preventive Dentistry, Center of Dental Medicine,
University of Zurich, 8032 Zurich, Switzerland.

Oral bacteria possess the ability to form biofilms on solid surfaces. After the
penetration of oral bacteria into the pulp, the contact between biofilms and pulp
tissue may result in pulpitis, pulp necrosis and/or periapical lesion. Depending 
on the environmental conditions and the availability of nutrients in the pulp
chamber and root canals, mainly Gram-negative anaerobic microorganisms
predominate and form the intracanal endodontic biofilm. The objective of the
present study was to investigate the role of different substrates on biofilm
formation as well as the separate and collective incorporation of six endodontic 
pathogens, namely Enterococcus faecalis, Staphylococcus aureus, Prevotella
nigrescens, Selenomonas sputigena, Parvimonas micra and Treponema denticola into 
a nine-species "basic biofilm". This biofilm was formed in vitro as a standard
subgingival biofilm, comprising Actinomyces oris, Veillonella dispar,
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Streptococcus anginosus, Streptococcus oralis,
Prevotella intermedia, Campylobacter rectus, Porphyromonas gingivalis, and
Tannerella forsythia. The resulting endodontic-like biofilms were grown 64 h
under the same conditions on hydroxyapatite and dentin discs. After harvesting
the endodontic-like biofilms, the bacterial growth was determined using
quantitative real-time PCR, were labeled using fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and analyzed by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). The addition of
six endodontic pathogens to the "basic biofilm" induced a decrease in the cell
number of the "basic" species. Interestingly, C. rectus counts increased in
biofilms containing E. faecalis, S. aureus, P. nigrescens and S. sputigena,
respectively, both on hydroxyapatite and on dentin discs, whereas P. intermedia
counts increased only on dentin discs by addition of E. faecalis. The growth of
E. faecalis on hydroxyapatite discs and of E. faecalis and S. aureus on dentin
discs were significantly higher in the biofilm containing all species than in the
"basic biofilm". Contrarily, the counts of P. nigrescens, S. sputigena and P.
micra on hydroxyapatite discs as well as counts of P. micra and T. denticola on
dentin discs decreased in the all-species biofilm. Overall, all bacterial species
associated with endodontic infections were successfully incorporated into the
standard multispecies biofilm model both on hydroxyapatite and dentin discs.
Thus, future investigations on endodontic infections can rely on this newly
established endodontic-like multispecies biofilm model.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8050674 
PMCID: PMC7285038
PMID: 32384777 

