
1. J Bacteriol. 2020 Aug 17. pii: JB.00461-20. doi: 10.1128/JB.00461-20. [Epub ahead
of print]

Autotransporters drive biofilm formation and auto-aggregation in the diderm
Firmicute Veillonella parvula.

Béchon N(1)(2), Jiménez-Fernández A(1), Witwinowski J(3), Bierque E(1)(4)(5),
Taib N(3)(6), Cokelaer T(6)(7), Ma L(7), Ghigo JM(1), Gribaldo S(3), Beloin C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Biofilm Laboratory, Institut Pasteur, UMR CNRS2001, Paris, 75015, 
France.
(2)Université de Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Unit Evolutionary Biology of the Microbial Cell, Institut Pasteur, UMR
CNRS2001, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Université, Collège doctoral, F-75005 Paris, France.
(5)Present address: Leptospirosis Research and Expertise Unit, Institut Pasteur
in New Caledonia, Institut Pasteur International Network, Noumea, New Caledonia.
(6)Hub de Bioinformatique et Biostatistique - Département Biologie
Computationnelle, Institut Pasteur, USR 3756 CNRS, Paris, France.
(7)Plate-forme Technologique Biomics - Centre de Ressources et Recherches
Technologiques (C2RT), Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(8)Genetics of Biofilm Laboratory, Institut Pasteur, UMR CNRS2001, Paris, 75015, 
France christophe.beloin@pasteur.fr.

The Negativicutes are a clade of Firmicutes that have retained the ancestral
diderm character and possess an outer membrane. One of the best studied
Negativicute, Veillonella parvula, is an anaerobic commensal and opportunistic
pathogen inhabiting complex human microbial communities, including the gut and
the dental plaque microbiota. Whereas adhesion and biofilm capacity of V. parvula
is expected to be crucial for its maintenance and development in these
environments, studies of V. parvula adhesion have been hindered by the lack of
efficient genetic tools to perform functional analyses in this bacterium. Here,
we took advantage of a recently described naturally transformable V. parvula
isolate, SKV38, and adapted tools developed for the closely related Clostridia
spp. to perform random transposon and targeted mutagenesis to identify V. parvula
genes involved in biofilm formation. We show that type V secreted
autotransporters -typically found in diderm bacteria- are the main determinants
of V. parvula auto-aggregation and biofilm formation, and compete with each other
for binding either to cells or to surfaces, with strong consequences on V.
parvula biofilm formation capacity. The identified trimeric autotransporters have
an original structure compared to classical autotransporters identified in
Proteobacteria with an additional C-terminal domain. We also show that
inactivation of the gene coding for a poorly characterized metal-dependent
phosphohydrolase HD domain protein conserved in the Firmicutes and their closely 
related diderm phyla inhibits autotransporter-mediated biofilm formation. This
study paves the way for further molecular characterization of V. parvula
interactions with other bacteria and the host within complex microbiota
environments.IMPORTANCE Veillonella parvula is an anaerobic commensal and
opportunistic pathogen whose ability to adhere to surfaces or other bacteria and 
form biofilms is critical to inhabit complex human microbial communities such as 
the gut and oral microbiota. Although the adhesive capacity of V. parvula has
been previously described, very little is known about the underlying molecular
mechanisms due to a lack of genetically amenable Veillonella strains. In this
study, we took advantage of a naturally transformable V. parvula isolate and
newly adapted genetic tools to identify surface exposed adhesin called
autotransporters as the main molecular determinants of adhesion in this
bacterium. This work therefore provides new insights on an important aspect of V.
parvula lifestyle, opening new possibilities for mechanistic studies of the
contribution of biofilm formation to the biology of this major commensal of the
oral-digestive tract.

Copyright © 2020 Béchon et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00461-20 
PMID: 32817093 

