
1. J Photochem Photobiol B. 2020 Apr;205:111826. doi:
10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2020.111826. Epub 2020 Feb 19.

Effects of a novel gel containing 5-aminolevulinic acid and red LED against
bacteria involved in peri-implantitis and other oral infections.

Radunović M(1), Petrini M(2), Vlajic T(1), Iezzi G(3), Di Lodovico S(4),
Piattelli A(5), D'Ercole S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Microbiology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Specialist in Oral Surgery, Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological
Science, University G. d'Annunzio of Chieti, Italy. Electronic address:
petrini.morena@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sciences, University of
Chieti, Italy.
(4)Microbiology Unit, Department of Pharmacy, University of Chieti, Italy.
(5)Dean of Oral Pathology, Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological
Sciences, University of Chieti, Italy, Ceo of Biomaterials Engineering,
Universidad Catolica de San Antonio de Murcia, Spain, Fondazione Villa Serena per
la Ricerca, Città S. Angelo, Italy.
(6)Microbiology and Paediatric Dentistry Unit, Department of Medical, Oral and
Biotechnological Sciences, University of Chieti, Via dei Vestini 31, 66013,
Italy.

Antibiotic resistance is a major public health problem worldwide and the finding 
of alternative methods for eliminating bacteria is one of the prerogatives of
medical research. The indiscriminate use of antibiotics in dentistry, especially 
for the treatment of peri-implantitis, could lead to superinfections. Alternative
methods, like photodynamic therapy mediated by the use of aminolevulinic acid and
a red light has been largely described, especially in dentistry, but results were
encouraging against Gram-positive bacteria, but limited against Gram-negative.
The effectiveness of photodynamic therapy mediated by a novel product containing 
aminolevulinic acid, Aladent (ALAD) has been tested in this in vitro study,
against different types of bacteria particularly involved in the infections of
the oral cavity and peri-implantitis. The novelty of ALAD is the marked
hydrophilicity that should increase the passage of the molecule through the
membrane pores of Gram-negative bacteria. Considering the novelty of the product 
a preliminary experiment permitted to test the effectiveness against Enterococcus
faecalis after 1 h of ALAD incubation at different concentrations, with or
without different timings of LED irradiation. The count of CFUs and the live/dead
observation with fluorescent microscopy showed a significant reduction and
killing of bacterium. Then, in the second stage, that could meet the necessity of
effectiveness and the clinician's requests to reduce the timing of treatment,
ALAD, with and without irradiation, was tested on Staphylococcus aureus,
Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Veillonella parvula and Porphyromonas
gingivalis. In particular, the efficiency of different concentrations of the
product after a 25 min incubation was tested with and without the adjunctive LED 
irradiation for 5 min. A slight ALAD bactericidal effect was reported for all
bacteria, also without LED irradiation, however, the most effective treatment was
25 min of 50% ALAD incubation followed by 5 min of a red LED. The in vitro tests 
demonstrated that ALAD gel with LED irradiation exerts a potent antibacterial
activity on different bacteria, both Gram-positive and Gram-negative.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2020.111826 
PMID: 32146270 

