
1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2020 Mar 30;682:108278. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2020.108278.
Epub 2020 Jan 23.

Identification of hyperglycemia-associated microbiota alterations in saliva and
gingival sulcus.

Wei YS(1), Hsiao YC(2), Su GW(3), Chang YR(4), Lin HP(5), Wang YS(1), Tsai YT(1),
Liao EC(1), Chen HY(1), Chou HC(6), Ko ML(7), Kuo WH(8), Chang SJ(9), Cheng
WC(10), Chan HL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hsinchu Mackay Memorial Hospital, 
Taiwan.
(3)Dental Department of Hsinchu Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan; General Biologicals
Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(5)General Biologicals Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sciences, National
Tsing Hua University, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Sciences, National
Tsing Hua University, Taiwan; Department of Ophthalmology, National Taiwan
University Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hsinchu MacKay Memorial Hospital,
Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(10)General Biologicals Corporation, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address:
wccheng888@gmail.com.
(11)Institute of Bioinformatics and Structural Biology and Department of Medical 
Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address:
hlchan@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Oral microbes are a contributing factor to hyperglycemia by inducing an increase 
in insulin resistance resulting in uncontrolled blood glucose levels. However,
the relationship between the distribution of oral flora and hyperglycemia is
still controversial. Combining the power of MALDI-Biotyper with anaerobic
bacterial culture, this study explores the correlation between anaerobic bacteria
in the oral cavity and blood glucose levels. The results demonstrated that
altered blood glucose levels contributed to a varied bacterial distribution in
the oral cavity. Specifically, Veillonella spp. and Prevotella spp. were
identified in a higher proportion in people with elevated blood glucose levels.
Six bacterial species identified in this study (Prevotella melaninogenica,
Campylobacter rectus, Streptococcus gordonii, Streptococcus mitis, Streptococcus 
salivarius, and Veillonella parvula) not only demonstrated a positive association
with higher blood glucose levels, but also likely contribute to the development
of the condition. The data demonstrated MALDI-TOF MS to be a simpler, faster, and
more economical clinical identification tool that provides clarity and depth to
the research on blood glucose and oral microbiota.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2020.108278 
PMID: 31981541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare no competing interests.

