
1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2020 Oct 1;86(20). pii: e01255-20. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01255-20. Print 2020 Oct 1.

Nitrite Production from Nitrate and Its Link with Lactate Metabolism in Oral
Veillonella spp.

Wicaksono DP(1)(2), Washio J(1), Abiko Y(1), Domon H(1), Takahashi N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Ecology and Biochemistry, Department of Ecological Dentistry,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Faculty of Dental Medicine, Universitas
Airlangga, Surabaya, Indonesia.
(3)Division of Oral Ecology and Biochemistry, Department of Ecological Dentistry,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai, Japan
nobuhiro.takahashi.a5@tohoku.ac.jp.

Veillonella species are among the major anaerobes in the oral cavity and are
frequently detected in both caries lesions and healthy oral microbiomes. They
possess the ability to utilize lactate and convert nitrate (NO3 -) into nitrite
(NO2 -). Recently, interest in NO2 - has increased rapidly because of its
beneficial effects on oral and general health; i.e., it inhibits the growth and
metabolism of oral pathogenic bacteria, such as Streptococcus mutans, and lowers 
systemic blood pressure. However, there is only limited information about the
biochemical characteristics of NO2 - production by Veillonella species. We found 
that NO3 - did not inhibit the growth of Veillonella atypica or Veillonella
parvula, and it inhibited the growth of Streptococcus mutans only at a high
concentration (100 mM). However, NO2 - inhibited the growth of Streptococcus
mutans at a low concentration (0.5 mM), while a higher concentration of NO2 -
(20 mM) was needed to inhibit the growth of Veillonella species. NO2 - production
by Veillonella species was increased by environmental factors (lactate, acidic
pH, and anaerobic conditions) and growth conditions (the presence of NO3 - or NO2
-) and was linked to anaerobic lactate metabolism. A stoichiometric evaluation
revealed that NO3 - is reduced to NO2 - by accepting reducing power derived from 
the oxidization of lactate. These findings suggest that the biochemical
characteristics of NO2 - production from NO3 - and its linkage with lactate
metabolism in oral Veillonella species may play a key role in maintaining good
oral and general health.IMPORTANCE The prevalence of dental caries is still high 
around the world. Dental caries is initiated when the teeth are exposed to acid, 
such as lactic acid, produced via carbohydrate metabolism by acidogenic
microorganisms. Veillonella species, which are among the major oral
microorganisms, are considered to be beneficial bacteria due to their ability to 
convert lactic acid to weaker acids and to produce NO2 - from NO3 -, which is
thought to be good for both oral and general health. Therefore, it is clear that 
there is a need to elucidate the biochemical characteristics of NO2 - production 
in Veillonella species. The significance of our research is that we have found
that lactate metabolism is linked to NO2 - production by Veillonella species in
the environment found in the oral cavity. This study suggests that Veillonella
species are potential candidates for maintaining oral and general health.

Copyright © 2020 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01255-20 
PMID: 32769185 

