
1. J Periodontal Res. 2020 Aug;55(4):503-510. doi: 10.1111/jre.12737. Epub 2020 Feb 
24.

A peptide coating preventing the attachment of Porphyromonas gingivalis on the
surfaces of dental implants.

Fang D(1), Yuran S(2), Reches M(2), Catunda R(1), Levin L(1), Febbraio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(2)Institute of Chemistry and The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate whether a peptide-based
coating can prevent the adhesion of Porphyromonas gingivalis, a key human
pathogen associated with periodontitis and peri-implantitis.
BACKGROUND: Nonsurgical and surgical interventions have been used for the
treatment of peri-implantitis; however, the effectiveness of these approaches is 
usually unsatisfactory. The main reason is that dental plaque on the surface of
the implant is difficult to remove due to its rough surface and thread design.
Recently, a peptide-based coating for implant surfaces that can reject the
adhesion of Escherichia coli and improve the attachment of host cells was
developed.
METHODS: A salivary pellicle was created on the surfaces of peptide-coated bare
discs and verified with anti-human immunoglobulin G, A and M, and
anti-fibrinogen. Early colonizers, Veillonella parvula and Streptococcus
sobrinus, and the later colonizer, Porphyromonas gingivalis, were labelled with
green and red fluorescent dyes, respectively, and seeded on the discs. Bacterial 
attachment was semi-quantified by fluorescence intensity.
RESULTS: The salivary pellicle was evenly distributed on the discs, with or
without the peptide coating, with an average thickness of 3.84 µm. A
multi-species dental biofilm was created on the salivary pellicle. The peptide
coating resulted in an approximate 25% reduction in the attachment of Veillonella
parvula and Streptococcus sobrinus, and a 50% reduction in
Porphyromonas gingivalis, when compared to control, uncoated implant discs.
CONCLUSION: The novel peptide-based coating can inhibit the attachment of
Porphyromonas gingivalis. It may have the potential to impede the development of 
peri-implantitis.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jre.12737 
PMID: 32096230 

