
1. Mol Microbiol. 2020 Mar;113(3):659-671. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14469.

One or two membranes? Diderm Firmicutes challenge the Gram-positive/Gram-negative
divide.

Megrian D(1)(2), Taib N(1)(3), Witwinowski J(1), Beloin C(4), Gribaldo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Unit Evolutionary Biology of the Microbial Cell,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(2)Ecole Doctorale Complexité du vivant, Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(3)Hub Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, Department of Computational Biology,
Institut Pasteur, USR 3756 CNRS, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Genetics of Biofilm Unit, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

How, when and why the transition between cell envelopes with one membrane
(Gram-positives or monoderms) and two (Gram-negative or diderms) occurred in
Bacteria is a key unanswered question in evolutionary biology. Different
hypotheses have been put forward, suggesting that either the monoderm or the
diderm phenotype is ancestral. The existence of diderm members in the classically
monoderm Firmicutes challenges the Gram-positive/Gram-negative divide and
provides a great opportunity to tackle the issue. In this review, we present
current knowledge on the diversity of bacterial cell envelopes, including these
atypical Firmicutes. We discuss how phylogenomic analysis supports the hypothesis
that the diderm cell envelope architecture is an ancestral character in the
Firmicutes, and that the monoderm phenotype in this phylum arose multiple times
independently by loss of the outer membrane. Given the overwhelming distribution 
of diderm phenotypes with respect to monoderm ones, this scenario likely extends 
to the ancestor of all bacteria. Finally, we discuss the recent development of
genetic tools for Veillonella parvula, a diderm Firmicute member of the human
microbiome, which indicates it as an emerging new experimental model to
investigate fundamental aspects of the diderm/monoderm transition.

© 2020 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14469 
PMID: 31975449 

