
1. Mol Ecol. 2020 Oct 1. doi: 10.1111/mec.15662. [Epub ahead of print]

Quorum-sensing signaling by chironomid egg masses' microbiota, affect
Haemagglutinin/Protease (HAP) production by Vibrio cholerae.

Sela R(1), Hammer BK(2)(3), Halpern M(1)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary and Environmental Biology, University of Haifa,
Haifa, 3498838, Israel.
(2)School of Biological Science, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA,
30332, USA.
(3)Center for Microbial Dynamics and Infection, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA.
(4)Department of Biology and Environment, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University
of Haifa at Oranim, Tivon, 3600600, Israel.

Vibrio cholerae, the causative agent of cholera, is commonly isolated, along with
other bacterial species, from chironomid insects (Diptera: Chironomide).
Nevertheless, its prevalence in the chironomid egg masses' microbiota is less
than 0.5%. V. cholerae secretes haemagglutinin/protease (HAP) that degrades the
gelatinous matrix of chironomid egg masses and prevents hatching. Quorum sensing 
(QS) activates HAP production in response to accumulation of bacterial
autoinducers (AIs). Our aim was to define the impact of chironomid microbiota on 
HAP production by V. cholerae. To study QS signaling, we used V. cholerae
bioluminescence reporter strains (QS-proficient O1 El-Tor wild type and
QS-deficient mutants) and different bacterial species that we isolated from
chironomid egg masses. These egg mass isolates, as well as a synthetic AI-2,
caused an enhancement in lux expression by a V. cholerae QS-deficient mutant. The
addition of the egg mass bacterial isolate supernatant to the QS-deficient mutant
also enhanced HAP production and egg mass degradation activities. Moreover, the
V. cholerae wild type strain was able to proliferate using egg masses as their
sole carbon source while the QS-deficient was not. The results demonstrate that
members of the chironomid bacterial consortium produce external chemical cues
that, like AI-2, induce expression of the hapA gene in V. cholerae. Understanding
the interactions between V. cholerae and the insects' microbiota may help uncover
the interactions between this pathogen and the human gut microbiota.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/mec.15662 
PMID: 33001525 

