
1. Curr Aging Sci. 2020 Sep 29. doi: 10.2174/1874609813666200929113341. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Designing an Outer Membrane Protein (Omp-W) Based Vaccine for Immunization
against Vibrio and Salmonella: An in silico approach.

Tehrani SS(1), Jahangiri A(1), Taheri-Anganeh M(2), Maghsoudi H(3), Khalili S(4),
Fana SE(5), Maniati M(6), Amani J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Applied Microbiology Research Center, Baqiyatallah University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran. Iran.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Research Institute on Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia. Iran.
(3)Student Research Committee, Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol. Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran. Iran.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran. Iran.
(6)English Department, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz.
Iran.

BACKGROUND: Cholera triggered by Vibrio cholerae remains the main reason of
morbidity and mortality all over the world. In addition, salmonellosis is
regarded as an infectious disease that makes it essential for identification and 
detection of salmonella. With a beta-barrel structure consisting of eight
non-parallel beta strands, OmpW family are widely distributed among gram-negative
bacteria. Moreover, OmpW isolated from S. Typhimurium and Vibrio cholerae can be 
used in vaccine design.
METHODS: Topology prediction was determined. T-cell and B-cell epitopes were
selected from exposed areas, and sequence conservancy was evaluated. The
remaining loops and inaccessible residues were removed to prepare OmpW-1. High
antigenicity peptides were detected to replace inappropriate residues to obtain
OmpW-2. Physicochemical properties were assessed, and antigenicity,
hydrophobicity, flexibility, and accessibility were compared to the native Omp-W 
structure. Low score areas were removed from the designed structure for preparing
the OmpW-3. To construct OmpW-4, TTFrC was used as T-CD4+ cell-stimulating factor
and CTB as adjuvants to the end of the C-terminal of this sequence, which can
increase the antigenicity and sequence density. The sequences were re-analyzed to
delete the unfavorable residues. Besides, the solubility of the mature OmpW and
the designed structure were predicted while overexpressed in E. coli.
RESULTS: The designed vaccine is a stable protein which has immune cells
recognizing epitopes and is considered as an antigen. The construct can be
overexpressed in a E. coli.
CONCLUSION: The multi-epitope vaccine is a suitable stimulator for immune system 
and would be a candidate for experimental research. Recent patents describing
numerous inventions related to the clinical facets of vaccine peptide against
human infectious disease.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1874609813666200929113341 
PMID: 32990553 

