
1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Oct 2. pii: 202010011. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2010011117. [Epub ahead of print]

CO2-leakage-driven diffusiophoresis causes spontaneous accumulation of charged
materials in channel flow.

Shim S(1), Stone HA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ 08540 sshim@princeton.edu hastone@princeton.edu.

We identify a phenomenon where the onset of channel flow creates an unexpected,
charge-dependent accumulation of colloidal particles, which occurs in a
common-flow configuration with gas-permeable walls, but in the absence of any
installed source of gas. An aqueous suspension of either positively charged
(amine-modified polystyrene; a-PS) or negatively charged (polystyrene; PS)
particles that flowed into a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) channel created
charge-dependent accumulation 2 to 4 min after the onset of flow. We unravel the 
phenomenon with systematic experiments under various conditions and model
calculations considering permeability of the channel walls and [Formula: see
text]-driven diffusiophoresis. We demonstrate that such spontaneous transport of 
particles is driven by the gas leakage through permeable walls, which is induced 
by the pressure difference between the channel and the ambient. Since the liquid 
pressure is higher, an outward flux of gas forms in the flow. We also observe the
phenomenon in a bacterial suspension of Vibrio cholerae, where the fluorescent
protein (mKO; monomeric Kusabira Orange) and bacterial cells show
charge-dependent separation in a channel flow. Such experimental observations
show that diffusiophoresis of charged particles in an aqueous suspension can be
achieved by having gas leakage through permeable walls, without any preimposed
ion-concentration gradient in the liquid phase. Our findings will help resolve
unexpected challenges and biases in on-chip experiments involving particles and
gas-permeable walls and help understand similar configurations that naturally
exist in physiological systems, such as pulmonary capillaries. We also
demonstrate potential applications, such as concentrating and collecting proteins
below the isoelectric point.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2010011117 
PMID: 33008879 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interest statement: The authors declare
no financial conflicts. H.A.S. is 50% owner of Phoresis, Inc., which is a startup
seeking to utilize diffusiophoresis as a technology for removing particles from
water. There are no competing interests with the ideas discussed in this paper.

