
1. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2020 Sep 29. doi: 10.1021/acsami.0c14313. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Characterization of the Vibriocidal Activity of Chitosan Microparticles: A
Potential Therapeutic Agent for Emerging Multi-Drug Resistant Cholera Infections.

Weppelmann TA, Jeong KC, Ali A.

Due to increasing reports of multi-drug resistant (MDR) Vibrio cholerae O1, the
goal of this study was to characterize the in vitro antimicrobial activity of
chitosan microparticles (CMs) to evaluate their potential as a novel therapeutic 
agent for cholera. We examined the antimicrobial activity of CMs against
toxigenic V. cholerae O1 using direct enumeration, microscopy, and fluorescence
microplate assays. Bacterial viability kinetics were measured with different
concentrations of CMs, solution pH, and salt content using a live/dead staining
technique. Growth inhibition of CM-exposed V. cholerae strains conducted using a 
redox-sensitive stain and compared between wild-type and isogenic outer membrane 
(OM) mutants. CM concentrations above 0.1% wt. were sufficient to kill V.
cholerae O1 suspensions with approximately 108 CFU/mL within three hours. The
non-viable cells demonstrated increased OM permeability that corresponded to
gross morphological changes observed through scanning electron microscopy. CMs
exhibited dose-dependent bactericidal activity that increased predictably at
lower pH and decreased with salt addition. V. cholerae O1 strains lacking
O-antigen were twice as susceptible to growth inhibition by CMs, whereas those
with glycine modification to lipid A were ten times more resistant. We propose
that CM exert vibriocidal activity via electrostatic surface interactions between
their positively charged amine groups and the negatively charged gram-negative
bacterial OM, resulting in disruption, increased permeability, decreased redox
metabolism, and subsequent loss of cellular viability. Further research should be
conducted in vivo to evaluate the efficacy of CMs as luminal agents to treat
infections caused by MDR, toxigenic V. cholerae and other diarrheal pathogens.

DOI: 10.1021/acsami.0c14313 
PMID: 32990431 

