
1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2019 Dec 6:1-3. doi: 10.1556/030.66.2019.027. [Epub 
ahead of print]

An unusual case of peritoneal dialysis-associated bacterial peritonitis caused by
Weeksella virosa.

Unalan T(1), Karagoz A(2), Bayhan C(3), Ozsurekci Y(3), Hazirolan G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Microbiology,Hacettepe University, 
Ankara,Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Department of Microbiology,Usak
University, Usak,Turkey.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases,Hacettepe
University, Ankara,Turkey.

Weeksella virosa is an atypical Gram-negative bacterium that does not grow on
MacConkey agar. In this report, we present a 4-year-old female patient with
Addison's disease and end-stage renal failure secondary to focal sclerosing
glomerulosclerosis. Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis had been performed,
and 3 months later, the patient developed fever, diarrhea, and vomiting.
Peritoneal fluid culture and dialysis fluid culture were positive for W. virosa. 
It was identified with Phoenix (BD, USA) and confirmed via 16S rRNA sequencing.
It cannot be identified by Maldi Biotyper (Bruker). The isolate was found to be
resistant to cephalosporins, ciprofloxacin, and amikacin by gradient test.
Intraperitoneal cefepime was initiated but since antimicrobial susceptibility
testing revealed cephalosporin resistance, therapy was changed to intraperitoneal
meropenem. Following the removal of peritoneal dialysis catheter, fever,
abdominal distention, and vomiting were resolved. Piperacillin, aztreonam, and
carbapenems can be used for empirical therapy. Antimicrobial susceptibility
testing should be performed to guide the choice of treatment. Removal of
peritoneal dialysis catheter is an important step of management of this
infection. To our knowledge, this is the first report of W. virosa in a pediatric
patient and first report from Turkey.

DOI: 10.1556/030.66.2019.027 
PMID: 31813264 

