
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Apr 22. doi: 10.1111/jam.14671. [Epub ahead of print]

Weissella paramesenteroides WpK4 ameliorate the experimental amoebic colitis by
increasing the expression of MUC-2 and the intestinal epithelial regeneration.

Prado GKS(1)(2), Torrinha KC(1), Cruz RE(3), Gonçalves ABB(1)(2), Silva
CAV(1)(2), Oliveira FMS(3), Nunes AC(4), Gomes MA(3), Caliari MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Program in Pathology, Institute of Biological Sciences of the
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(2)Department of General Pathology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(3)Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal
University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil.
(4)Department of Genetics, Ecology and Evolution, Institute of Biological
Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais,
Brazil.

AIMS: This study evaluates the action of Weissella paramesenteroides WpK4 on
amoebic colitis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Weissella paramesenteroides WpK4 was administered in
Entamoeba dispar infected and noninfected mice and clinical parameters were
evaluated. Following 7 days, the caeca were collected for histopathology,
morphometry and immunohistochemical staining of MUC-2, CDC-47 and IgA. The
treatment reduced diarrhoea and the presence of blood in the faeces and
diminished the area of necrosis, also causing weight gain. Also, the addition of 
this bacterium enhanced the expression of the mucin (MUC-2). The reduction in
necrosis and increased CDC-47 expression indicates significant epithelial
regeneration. The negative correlation between CDC-47 and the necrosis area
reveals that the bacterium favoured the recovery of the necrotic regions and the 
positive correlation found between the expression of MUC-2 and CDC-47 indicates
that the epithelial regeneration also supports the synthesis of MUC-2.
CONCLUSIONS: Weissella paramesenteroides WpK4 was able to increase the protection
of the intestinal mucosa against experimental amoebic colitis through the
increase of MUC-2 and epithelial regeneration.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Weissella paramesenteroides WpK4 presents
the potential to become a complementary tool in the treatment of amoebic colitis.

© 2020 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14671 
PMID: 32320114 

