
1. Int J Food Microbiol. 2020 Aug 16;327:108652. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108652. Epub 2020 May 4.

Waste bread recycling as a baking ingredient by tailored lactic acid
fermentation.

Immonen M(1), Maina NH(2), Wang Y(2), Coda R(3), Katina K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Electronic address: mikko.o.immonen@helsinki.fi.
(2)Department of Food and Nutrition, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Food and Nutrition, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
Helsinki Institute of Sustainability Science, Department of Food and Nutrition,
University of Helsinki, Finland.

Food-grade waste and side streams should be strictly kept in food use in order to
achieve sustainable food systems. At present, the baking industry creates
food-grade waste as excess and deformed products that are mainly utilized for
non-food uses, such as bioethanol production. The purpose of this study was
therefore to explore the potential of waste wheat bread recycling for fresh wheat
bread production. Waste bread recycling was assessed without further processing
or after tailored fermentation with lactic acid bacteria producing either dextran
or β-glucan exopolysaccharides. When non-treated waste bread slurry was added to 
new bread dough, bread quality (specific volume and softness) decreased with
increasing content of waste bread addition. In situ EPS-production (dextran and
microbial β-glucan) significantly increased waste bread slurry viscosity and
yielded residual fructose or glucose that could effectively replace the sugar
added for yeast leavening. Furthermore, fermentation acidified waste bread
matrix, thus improving the hygienic safety of the process. Bread containing
dextran synthesized in situ by Weissella confusa A16 showed good technological
quality. The produced dextran compensated the adverse effect of recycled bread on
new bread quality attributes by 12% increase in bread specific volume and 37%
decrease in crumb hardness. In this study, a positive technological outcome of
the bread containing microbial β-glucan was not detected. The waste bread
fermented by W. confusa A16 containing dextran appears to enable safe bread
recycling with low acidity and minimal quality loss.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108652 
PMID: 32442778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

