
1. Microorganisms. 2020 Sep 10;8(9). pii: E1388. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8091388.

Genome-Assisted Characterization of Lactobacillus fermentum, Weissella cibaria,
and Weissella confusa Strains Isolated from Sorghum as Starters for Sourdough
Fermentation.

Falasconi I(1), Fontana A(1), Patrone V(1), Rebecchi A(2), Duserm Garrido G(1),
Principato L(1), Callegari ML(2), Spigno G(1), Morelli L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Sustainable Food Process (DiSTAS), Università Cattolica del
Sacro Cuore, 29122 Piacenza, Italy.
(2)Biotechnological Research Centre, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 26100 
Cremona, Italy.

Sourdough fermentation of bakery products is a well-established and widespread
technique to confer an added value to the resulting food. In recent decades,
gluten-free raw materials have gained more attention due to the diffusion of food
disorders such as coeliac disease, but, at the same time, they present difficult 
manipulation and scarce technological properties because of the absence of
gluten. For this reason, the present work was aimed at selecting starter cultures
for sourdough application that are isolated from fermentation of sorghum flour.
Three isolates of Lactobacillus fermentum, Weissella cibaria, and Weissella
confusa were selected for the following properties: exopolysaccharide synthesis, 
acidification, CO2 production, and amylase activity. The investigated phenotypic 
characteristics were confirmed by genomic analyses, which also highlighted other 
potentially beneficial features for use in bakery products employment. These
strains, together with bakery yeast, were used for bread preparation using
sorghum and wheat flour and after 24 h of fermentation the resulting dough was
analyzed to assess the improvement of its characteristics. The presence of lactic
acid bacteria (LAB) had a great impact on the final dough, and the best
preparation, from a rheological point of view, resulted in one made of sorghum
and wheat flour with added LAB and bakery yeast, whose resulting characteristics 
were similar to all wheat flour doughs. The results of this study suggest a
potential application of the selected starters in sorghum composite bread and
should be validated with data from large-scale pilot tests conducted in
industrial bakeries.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8091388 
PMID: 32927810 

