
1. Microorganisms. 2020 May 28;8(6). pii: E812. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms8060812.

Characterization of Indigenous Lactic Acid Bacteria in Cow Milk of the Maltese
Islands: A Geographical and Seasonal Assessment.

Garroni E(1), Doulgeraki AI(2), Pavli F(1), Spiteri D(1), Valdramidis VP(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Sciences and Nutrition, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Malta, Msida MSD 2080, Malta.
(2)Institute of Technology of Agricultural Products, Hellenic Agricultural
Organization-Demeter, S. Venizelou 1, 14123 Lycovrissi, Greece.
(3)Centre of Molecular Medicine and Biobanking, University of Malta, MSD 2080
Msida, Malta.

A geographical and seasonal assessment of indigenous lactic acid bacteria (LAB)
in Maltese cow milk was conducted in this study. To investigate this, milk was
collected from different regions of Malta during winter and summer seasons. Total
viable counts (TVC) and LAB population were enumerated. Afterwards, LAB were
isolated and identified by molecular methods. According to the results, similar
TVC were enumerated on winter and summer samples, while highest LAB population
was detected on summer samples. LAB isolates were grouped in seven different
clusters which were assigned to Lactobacillus casei, Pediococcus pentosaceus,
Lactobacillus plantarum, Weissella paramesenteroides, Lactobacillus rhamnosus,
Lactococcus lactis, and Lactococcus garvieae. In addition, Enterococcus and
Streptococcus species were also isolated. Season seemed to affect the genus /
species of LAB since Lactobacillus were mainly isolated from winter samples,
while Lactococcus and Enterococcus species were the main genera identified in
summer samples. Regarding the geographical distribution, the majority of the
Lactobacillus spp. were isolated from the South-eastern region in both seasons.
In conclusion, through this study the diversity of indigenous LAB in the Maltese 
cow milk was monitored for the first time and highlighted that the microbial
communities are affected by seasonality and geographical distribution of the
farms.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms8060812 
PMCID: PMC7355691
PMID: 32481649 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

