
1. J Vis Exp. 2020 Jun 16;(160). doi: 10.3791/60842.

Synthesis of Functionalized Magnetic Nanoparticles, Their Conjugation with the
Siderophore Feroxamine and its Evaluation for Bacteria Detection.

Martínez-Matamoros D(1), Castro-García S(1), Ojeda Romano G(2), Balado M(3),
Rodríguez J(1), Lemos ML(3), Jiménez C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigacións Científicas Avanzadas (CICA), Departamento de
Química, Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña.
(2)Centro de Investigacións Científicas Avanzadas (CICA), Unidad de Comunicación 
y Divulgación, Universidade da Coruña.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Institute of Aquaculture,
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
(4)Centro de Investigacións Científicas Avanzadas (CICA), Departamento de
Química, Facultade de Ciencias, Universidade da Coruña; carlos.jimenez@udc.es.

In the present work, the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles, its coating with
SiO2, followed by its amine functionalization with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
(APTES) and its conjugation with deferoxamine, a siderophore recognized by
Yersinia enterocolitica, using a succinyl moiety as a linker are described.
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNP) of magnetite (Fe3O4) were prepared by solvothermal
method and coated with SiO2 (MNP@SiO2) using the Stöber process followed by
functionalization with APTES (MNP@SiO2@NH2). Then, feroxamine was conjugated with
the MNP@SiO2@NH2 by carbodiimide coupling to give MNP@SiO2@NH2@Fa. The morphology
and properties of the conjugate and intermediates were examined by eight
different methods including powder X-Ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform
infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and energy dispersive 
X-Ray (EDX) mapping. This exhaustive characterization confirmed the formation of 
the conjugate. Finally, in order to evaluate the capacity and specificity of the 
nanoparticles, they were tested in a capture bacteria assay using Yersinia
enterocolitica.

DOI: 10.3791/60842 
PMID: 32628159 

