
1. Trop Med Infect Dis. 2020 Jul 29;5(3). pii: E126. doi:
10.3390/tropicalmed5030126.

Parinaud's Oculoglandular Syndrome: A Case in an Adult with Flea-Borne Typhus and
a Review.

Dixon MK(1), Dayton CL(2), Anstead GM(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Scott & White Clinic, 800 Scott & White Drive, College Station, TX
77845, USA.
(2)Division of Critical Care, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health,
San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
(3)Medical Service, South Texas Veterans Health Care System, San Antonio, TX
78229, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of Texas
Health, San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Parinaud's oculoglandular syndrome (POGS) is defined as unilateral granulomatous 
conjunctivitis and facial lymphadenopathy. The aims of the current study are to
describe a case of POGS with uveitis due to flea-borne typhus (FBT) and to
present a diagnostic and therapeutic approach to POGS. The patient, a 38-year old
man, presented with persistent unilateral eye pain, fever, rash, preauricular and
submandibular lymphadenopathy, and laboratory findings of FBT: hyponatremia,
elevated transaminase and lactate dehydrogenase levels, thrombocytopenia, and
hypoalbuminemia. His condition rapidly improved after starting doxycycline. Soon 
after hospitalization, he was diagnosed with uveitis, which responded to topical 
prednisolone. To derive a diagnostic and empiric therapeutic approach to POGS, we
reviewed the cases of POGS from its various causes since 1976 to discern
epidemiologic clues and determine successful diagnostic techniques and therapies;
we found multiple cases due to cat scratch disease (CSD; due to Bartonella
henselae) (twelve), tularemia (ten), sporotrichosis (three), Rickettsia conorii
(three), R. typhi/felis (two), and herpes simplex virus (two) and single cases
due to tuberculosis, paracoccidioidomycosis, Yersinia enterocolitica, Pasteurella
multocida, Chlamydia trachomatis, Epstein-Barr virus, and Nocardia brasiliensis. 
Preauricular lymphadenopathy is a common clinical clue for POGS and is unusual in
viral and bacterial conjunctivitis. For POGS, the major etiological consideration
is B. henselae, which is usually diagnosed by the indirect immunofluorescence
serologic technique. Although CSD POGS is usually self-limited, oral azithromycin
may hasten resolution. However, other possible etiologies of POGS may also arise 
from cat or cat flea contact: sporotrichosis, tularemia, Pasteurella multocida,
or FBT. If there is no cat contact, other epidemiologic and clinical findings
should be sought, because several of these conditions, such as tularemia,
paracoccidioidomycosis, and tuberculosis, may have grave systemic complications. 
Although there are usually no long-term ocular sequelae if POGS is properly
diagnosed, it still may cause prolonged ocular discomfort and require multiple
physician contacts.

DOI: 10.3390/tropicalmed5030126 
PMID: 32751142 

