
1. Photodiagnosis Photodyn Ther. 2020 Oct 1:102038. doi:
10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.102038. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficacy of additional antimicrobial photodynamic therapy administered using
methylene blue, toluidine blue and tetra 2-mercaptopyridine substituted zinc
phthalocyanine in root canals contaminated with Enterococcus faecalis.

Er Karaoğlu G(1), Aydın ZU(2), Erdönmez D(3), Göl C(4), Durmuş M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal
University Bolu, Turkey.
(2)Department of Endodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal
University Bolu, Turkey. Electronic address: zlhugur@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Arts and Science, Aksaray University,
Aksaray, Turkey.
(4)Bolu Abant Izzet Baysal University, Innovative Food Technologies Development
Application and Research Center, Bolu, Turkey.
(5)Gebze Technical University, Department of Chemistry, Kocaeli, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Traditional chemomechanical treatment procedures are an indispensable
part of endodontic treatment, however, additional treatment approaches such as
antimicrobial photodynamic therapy (aPDT) are also recommended for the
elimination of residual microorganisms. In this study, the disinfection
efficiency of additional aPDT performed using methylene blue (MB), toluidine blue
(TB), and tetra 2-mercaptopyridine substituted zinc phthalocyanine (TM-ZnPc) was 
compared in the roots contaminated with Enterococcus faecalis (E. faecalis).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-nine teeth with a single root and canal were
included in this study. The roots were sterilized, and inoculated with E.
faecalis. The roots were kept in an incubator for 30 days to form the biofilm.
Forty-five teeth were prepared up to the F3 file of the ProTaperNext system under
2.5 % NaOCL irrigation. The samples were divided into three groups according to
the type of used photosensitizer (PS) (n = 15); MB (313 µM), TB (327 µM), and
TM-ZnPc (6µM). All PSs were irradiation with a light-emitting diode (LED) lamp
(630 nm, 2-4 mW/cm²) for the 60 s. Two microbiological samples of the intracanal 
content were taken (one before and one immediately after additional aPDT in all
groups) using sterile paper points. The colony-forming units per milliliter
(CFU/mL) were calculated after 24 h of incubation at 37 °C.
RESULTS: After all additional aPDT protocols, intracanal bacterial load decreased
significantly compared to the amount after chemomechanical preparation
(P < 0.05). No significant difference in the reduction in intracanal bacterial
load was found between the PSs (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: In the current study, the additional aPDT protocol performed with
TM-ZnPc provided similar antimicrobial efficacy, although it was used at a lower 
concentration compared to MB and TB. Therefore, the use of TM-ZnPc in intra-canal
disinfection in endodontics seems promising.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pdpdt.2020.102038 
PMID: 33010484 

