
1. J Appl Microbiol. 2020 Oct 2. doi: 10.1111/jam.14875. [Epub ahead of print]

Macrocyclic polyketides with siderophore mode of action from marine heterotrophic
Shewanella algae: Prospective anti-infective leads attenuate drug-resistant
pathogens.

Chakraborty K(1), Kizhakkekalam VK(1)(2), Joy M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Bioprospecting Section of Marine Biotechnology Division, Central Marine
Fisheries Research Institute, Ernakulam North, P.B. No. 1603, Cochin, India.
(2)Faculty of Marine Sciences, Lakeside Campus, Cochin University of Science and 
Technology, Cochin, Kerala State, India.

AIMS: Biotechnological and chemical characterization of previously undescribed
homologous siderophore-type macrocyclic polyketides from heterotrophic Shewanella
algae MTCC 12715 affiliated with Rhodophycean macroalga Hypnea valentiae of
marine origin, with significant anti-infective potential against drug-resistant
pathogens.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The heterotrophic bacterial strain in symbiotic association 
with intertidal macroalga H. valentiae was isolated to homogeneity in a
culture-dependent method and screened for bioactivities by spot-over-lawn assay. 
The bacterial organic extract was purified and characterized by extensive
chromatographic and spectroscopic methods, respectively, and was assessed for
antibacterial activities with disc diffusion and microtube dilution methods. The 
macrocyclic polyketide compounds exhibited wide-spectrum of anti-infective
potential against clinically significant vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus
faecalis (VREfs), methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, and Klebsiella pneumonia with minimum inhibitory concentration of
about 1-3 µg mL-1 , insomuch as the antibiotics chloramphenicol and ampicillin
were active at ≥ 6.25 µg mL-1 . The studied compounds unveiled Fe3+ chelating
activity, which designated that their prospective anti-infective activities
against the pathogens could be due to their siderophore mechanism of action. In
support of that, the bacterium exhibited siderophore production on bioassay
involving the cast upon culture agar plate, and the presence of siderophore
biosynthetic gene (≈1000 bp) (MF 981936). In silico molecular modeling with
penicillin-binding protein (PBP2a) coded by mecA genes of MRSA (docking score
11.68-12.69 kcal mol-1 ) verified their in vitro antibacterial activities.
Putative biosynthetic pathway of macrocyclic polyketides through stepwise
decarboxylative condensation initiated by malonate-acyl carrier protein further
validated their structural and molecular attributes.
CONCLUSIONS: The studied siderophore-type macrocyclic polyketides from S. algae
MTCC 12715 with significant anti-infective potential could be considered as
promising candidates for pharmaceutical and biotechnological applications,
especially against emerging multidrug-resistant pathogens.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The present study exhibited the
heterotrophic bacteria in association with intertidal macroalgae as propitious
biological resources to biosynthesize novel antibacterial agents.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.14875 
PMID: 33006801 

