
1. Antibiotics (Basel). 2020 Sep 30;9(10). pii: E657. doi:
10.3390/antibiotics9100657.

Enterococcus faecalis Endocarditis and Outpatient Treatment: A Systematic Review 
of Current Alternatives.

Herrera-Hidalgo L(1), de Alarcón A(2), López-Cortes LE(3), Luque-Márquez R(2),
López-Cortes LF(2), Gutiérrez-Valencia A(2)(4), Gil-Navarro MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Gestión Clinica de Farmacia, Hospital Universitario Virgen del
Rocío/CSIC/Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), 41009 Seville, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Gestión Clinica de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Microbiología y
Medicina Preventiva, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), 41009 Seville, Spain.
(3)Unidad de Gestión Clinica de Enfermedades Infecciosas, Microbiología y
Medicina Preventiva, Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena/CSIC/Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), 41009 Seville, Spain.
(4)Infección por el VIH y farmacocinética de antivirals, Instituto de Biomedicina
de Sevilla (IBiS), Antonio Maura Montaner Street s/n, 41009 Seville, Spain.

The selection of the best alternative for Enterococcus faecalis infective
endocarditis (IE) continuation treatment in the outpatient setting is still
challenging. Three databases were searched, reporting antibiotic therapies
against E. faecalis IE in or suitable for the outpatient setting. Articles the
results of which were identified by species and treatment regimen were included. 
The quality of the studies was assessed accordingly with the study design. Data
were extracted and synthesized narratively. In total, 18 studies were included.
The treatment regimens reported were classified regarding the main antibiotic
used as regimen, based on Aminoglycosides, dual β-lactam, teicoplanin, daptomycin
or dalbavancin or oral therapy. The regimens based on aminoglycosides and dual
β-lactam combinations are the treatment alternatives which gather more evidence
regarding their efficacy. Dual β-lactam is the preferred option for high level
aminoglycoside resistance strains, and for to its reduced nephrotoxicity, while
its adaptation to the outpatient setting has been poorly documented. Less
evidence supports the remaining alternatives, but many of them have been
successfully adapted to outpatient care. Teicoplanin and dalbavancin as well as
oral therapy seem promising. Our work provides an extensive examination of the
potential alternatives to E. faecalis IE useful for outpatient care. However, the
insufficient evidence hampers the attempt to give a general recommendation.

DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9100657 
PMID: 33007853 

