
1. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2020 Sep 29;17(19). pii: E7137. doi:
10.3390/ijerph17197137.

Markers Specific to Bacteroides fragilis Group Bacteria as Indicators of
Anthropogenic Pollution of Surface Waters.

Niestępski S(1), Harnisz M(1), Korzeniewska E(1), Osińska A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Engineering of Water Protection and Environmental Microbiology, 
Faculty of Geoengineering, University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn,
Prawocheńskiego 1, 10-720 Olsztyn, Poland.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the applicability of markers specific to
Bacteroides fragilis group (BFG) bacteria as indicators of anthropogenic
pollution of surface waters. In addition, the impact of wastewater treatment
plants (WWTPs) on the spread of genes specific to fecal indicator bacteria and
genes encoding antimicrobial resistance in water bodies was also determined.
Samples of hospital wastewater (HWW), untreated wastewater (UWW), and treated
wastewater (TWW) evacuated from a WWTP were collected, and samples of river water
were taken upstream (URW) and downstream (DRW) from the wastewater discharge
point to determine, by qPCR, the presence of genes specific to BFG, Escherichia
coli and Enterococcus faecalis, and the abundance of 11 antibiotic resistance
genes (ARGs) and two integrase genes. The total number of bacterial cells (TCN)
in the examined samples was determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH). Genes specific to BFG predominated among the analyzed indicator
microorganisms in HWW, and their copy numbers were similar to those of genes
specific to E. coli and E. faecalis in the remaining samples. The abundance of
genes specific to BFG was highly correlated with the abundance of genes
characteristic of E. coli and E. faecalis, all analyzed ARGs and intI genes. The 
results of this study indicate that genes specific to BFG can be used in analyses
of human fecal pollution, and as indicators of environmental contamination with
ARGs. A significant increase in the copy numbers of genes specific to BFG, E.
coli, and seven out of the 11 analyzed ARGs was noted in samples of river water
collected downstream from the wastewater discharge point, which suggests that
WWTPs are an important source of these genes in riparian environments.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph17197137 
PMID: 33003501 

